The use of advanced imaging in clinical practice is emerging and the use of this technology by optometrists in assessing patients with age-related macular degeneration is of interest. Therefore, this study explored contemporary, self-reported patterns of practice regarding age-related macular degeneration diagnosis and management using a cross-sectional survey of optometrists in Australia and New Zealand.
Practising optometrists were surveyed on four key areas, namely, demographics, clinical skills and experience, assessment and management of age-related macular degeneration. Questions pertaining to self-rated competency, knowledge and attitudes used a five-point Likert scale.
Completed responses were received from 127 and 87 practising optometrists in Australia and New Zealand, respectively. Advanced imaging showed greater variation in service delivery than traditional techniques (such as slitlamp funduscopy) and trended toward optical coherence tomography, which was routinely performed in age-related macular degeneration by 49 per cent of respondents. Optical coherence tomography was also associated with higher self-rated competency, knowledge and perceived relevance to practice than other modalities. Most respondents (93 per cent) indicated that they regularly applied patient symptoms, case history, visual function results and signs from traditional testing, when queried about their management of patients with age-related macular degeneration. Over half (63 per cent) also considered advanced imaging, while 31 per cent additionally considered all of these as well as the disease stage and clinical guidelines. Contrary to the evidence base, 68 and 34 per cent rated nutritional supplements as highly relevant or relevant in early age-related macular degeneration and normal aging changes, respectively.
These results highlight the emergence of multimodal and advanced imaging (especially optical coherence tomography) in the assessment of age-related macular degeneration by optometrists. Clinically significant variations in self-rated test competency and the understanding regarding nutritional supplements for different stages of age-related macular degeneration suggest that further work to up-skill optometrists may be required.
Age-related macular degeneration is the leading cause of blindness in elderly individuals in developed countries. The etiology and pathophysiology of age-related macular degeneration have not been elucidated yet. Knowing that the main pathological change of age-related macular degeneration is formation of drusen containing about 40% of lipids, there have been attempts to find associations between age-related macular degeneration and genes controlling lipid metabolism.
To determine the frequency of CYP2C19 (G681A) Rs4244285 and CYP1A2 (-163C>A) Rs762551 genotypes in patients with age-related macular degeneration.
The study enrolled 150 patients with early age-related macular degeneration and 296 age- and gender-matched healthy controls. The genotyping of Rs4244285 and Rs762551 was carried out by using the real-time polymerase chain reaction method.
The CYP1A2 (-163C>A) Rs762551 C/C genotype was more frequently detected in patients with age-related macular degeneration than in the control group (32.7% vs. 21.6%, p = 0.011) and was associated with an increased risk of developing early age-related macular degeneration (OR = 1.759, 95% CI: 1.133-2.729; p = 0.012). The CYP1A2 (-163C>A) Rs762551 C/A genotype was more frequently documented in the control group compared with patients with age-related macular degeneration (46.3% vs. 30.7%, p = 0.002) and was associated with a decreased risk of having age-related macular degeneration (OR = 0.580. 95% CI: 0.362-0.929, p = 0.023) in the co-dominant model.
The study showed that the CYP1A2 (-163C>A) Rs762551 C/C genotype was associated with an increased risk of age-related macular degeneration.
The present anti-angiogenic therapies for neovascular age-related macular degeneration require effective drug delivery systems for transfer drug molecules. Ranibizumab is an active humanized monoclonal antibody that counteracts active forms of vascular endothelial growth factor A in the neovascular age-related macular degeneration therapy. The development of ranibizumab-related therapies, we have designed the effective drug career with engineered magnetic nanoparticles (Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>) as a facile platform of ranibizumab delivery for the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Ranibizumab conjugated iron oxide (Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>)/PEGylated poly lactide-co-glycolide (PEG-PLGA) was successfully designed and the synthesized materials are analyzed different analytical techniques. The microscopic techniques (Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) & Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)) are clearly displayed that spherical nanoparticles into the PEG-PLGA matrix and presence of elements and chemical interactions confirmed by the results of energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) and Fourier trans-form infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic methods. The in vitro anti-angiogenic evaluation of Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>/PEG-PLGA polymer nanomaterial efficiently inhibits the tube formation in the Matrigel-based assay method by using human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Ranibizumab treated Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>/PEG-PLGA polymer nanomaterials not disturbed cell proliferation and the results could not display the any significant differences in human endothelial cells. The present investigated results describe that Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>/PEG-PLGA polymer nanomaterials can be highly favorable and novel formulation for the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
The aim of this study was to establish the prevalence and association of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and obesity which was not studied extensively in Indian population over 60 years of age.
This was a cross-sectional, population-based study. A total of 4791 patients with gradable fundus photography were included. All patients underwent detailed ophthalmic examination and AMD was graded with retinal photographs. Grading of AMD was done according to the International ARM Epidemiological Study Group and staged based on grading in worse eye. The association of AMD severity and obesity (based on body mass index, waist-hip ratio, waist circumference, isolated abdominal obesity, isolated generalized obesity, and combined obesity) was assessed. The main outcome variable was an association between the presence and severity of AMD with different grades of obesity.
No direct significant association was noted between the presence and severity of AMD and any obesity indices. Subgroup analyses based on lifestyle patterns and common systemic pathologies in AMD population were done. Late AMD was significantly associated with tobacco consumption in population with combined obesity (P = 0.033 and odds ratio = 2.998).
No direct association was noted between the presence or severity of AMD and obesity in South Indian population. However, indirect associations between the severity of AMD and combined obesity were found.
Age-related macular degeneration is the leading cause of adult blindness in the developed world. Thus, major endeavors to understand the risk factors and pathogenesis of this disease have been undertaken. Reticular macular disease is a proposed subtype of age-related macular degeneration correlating histologically with subretinal drusenoid deposits located between the retinal pigment epithelium and the inner segment ellipsoid zone. Reticular lesions are more prevalent in females and in older age groups and are associated with a higher mortality rate. Risk factors for developing age-related macular degeneration include hypertension, smoking, and angina. Several genes related to increased risk for age-related macular degeneration and reticular macular disease are also associated with cardiovascular disease. Better understanding of the clinical and genetic risk factors for age-related macular degeneration and reticular macular disease has led to the hypothesis that these eye diseases are systemic. A systemic origin may help to explain why reticular disease is diagnosed more frequently in females as males suffer cardiovascular mortality at an earlier age, before the age of diagnosis of reticular macular disease and age-related macular degeneration.
The aim of the study is to measure the impact of age-related macular degeneration on vision-related activity limitation and preference-based status for glaucoma patients.
This was a cross-sectional study.
Two-hundred glaucoma patients of whom 73 had age-related macular degeneration were included in the research.
Sociodemographic information, visual field parameters and visual acuity were collected. Age-related macular degeneration was scored using the Age-Related Eye Disease Study system.
The Rasch-analysed Glaucoma Activity Limitation-9 and the Visual Function Questionnaire Utility Index measured vision-related activity limitation and preference-based status, respectively. Regression models determined factors predictive of vision-related activity limitation and preference-based status. Differential item functioning compared Glaucoma Activity Limitation-9 item difficulty for those with and without age-related macular degeneration.
Mean age was 73.7 (±10.1) years. Lower better eye mean deviation (β: 1.42, 95% confidence interval: 1.24-1.63, P < 0.001) and age-related macular degeneration (β: 1.26 95% confidence interval: 1.10-1.44, P = 0.001) were independently associated with worse vision-related activity limitation. Worse eye visual acuity (β: 0.978, 95% confidence interval: 0.961-0.996, P = 0.018), high risk age-related macular degeneration (β: 0.981, 95% confidence interval: 0.965-0.998, P = 0.028) and severe glaucoma (β: 0.982, 95% confidence interval: 0.966-0.998, P = 0.032) were independently associated with worse preference-based status. Glaucoma patients with age-related macular degeneration found using stairs, walking on uneven ground and judging distances of foot to step/curb significantly more difficult than those without age-related macular degeneration.
Vision-related activity limitation and preference-based status are negatively impacted by severe glaucoma and age-related macular degeneration. Patients with both conditions perceive increased difficulty walking safely compared with patients with glaucoma alone.
The standard of care for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) involves ongoing intravitreal injections of anti-angiogenic drugs targeting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). The most commonly used anti-VEGF drugs are ranibizumab, bevacizumab and aflibercept. The main objective of the STAR trial is to determine if stereotactic radiotherapy can reduce the number of anti-VEGF injections that patients with nAMD require.
STAR is a multicentre, double-masked, randomised, sham-controlled clinical trial. It evaluates a new device (manufactured by Oraya, Newark, CA, USA) designed to deliver stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) to nAMD lesions. The trial enrols participants with chronic, active nAMD. Participants receive a single SRT treatment (16 Gy or sham) with a concomitant baseline intravitreal injection of 0.5 mg ranibizumab. Thereafter, they attend every month for 24 months, and ranibizumab is administered at the visit if retreatment criteria are met. The primary outcome is the number of pro re nata ranibizumab injections during the first 24 months. Secondary outcomes include visual acuity, lesion morphology, quality of life and safety. Additional visits occur at 36 and 48 months to inspect for radiation retinopathy. The target sample size of 411 participants (randomised 2:1 in favour of radiation) is designed to detect a reduction of 2.5 injections against ranibizumab monotherapy, at 90% power, and a significance level (alpha) of 0.025 (one-sided two-sample t test). This gives 97% power to detect non-inferiority of visual acuity at a five-letter margin. The primary analyses will be by intention to treat.
The safety and efficacy outcomes will help determine the role of SRT in the management of chronic, active nAMD.
International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial Number: ISRCTN12884465. Registered on 28 November 2014. ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02243878 . Registered on 17 September 2014.
Age-related macular degeneration is a multifactorial disease that can lead to vision impairment in older individuals. Although the etiology of age-related macular degeneration remains unknown, risk factors include age, ethnicity, smoking, hypertension, obesity, and genetic factors. Two main loci have been identified through genome-wide association studies, on chromosomes 1 and 10. Among the variants located at the 10q26 region, rs11200638, located at the HTRA1 gene promoter, has been associated with age-related macular degeneration in several populations and is considered the main polymorphism. We conducted a replication case-control study to analyze the frequency and participation of rs11200638 in the etiology of age-related macular degeneration in a sample of patients and controls from the State of São Paulo, Brazil, through polymerase chain reaction and enzymatic digestion. The frequency of the A allele was 57.60% in patients with age-related macular degeneration and 36.45% in controls (p value < 1e-07), representing a 2.369-fold higher risk factor for the disease. Both the AA and AG genotypes were observed more frequently in the age-related macular degeneration group compared to the control group (p = 1.21<sup>e-07</sup> and 0.0357, respectively). No statistically significant results were observed after stratification in dry versus wet types or advanced versus non-advanced forms. To our knowledge, this is the first time the association between rs11200638 and overall age-related macular degeneration has been reported in South America.
It is of great therapeutic significance that disordered function of the vascular endothelium which supply the affected ocular structures plays a major role in the pathogenesis and development of age-related macular degeneration. Chronic inflammation is closely linked to diseases associated with endothelial dysfunction, and age-related macular degeneration is accompanied by a general inflammatory response. According to current concept, age-related macular degeneration is a local manifestation of systemic vascular disease. This recognition could have therapeutic implications because restoration of endothelial dysfunction can restabilize the condition of chronic vascular disease including age-related macular degeneration as well. Restoration of endothelial dysfunction by pharmaacological or non pharmacological interventions may prevent the development or improve endothelial dysfunction, which result in prevention or improvement of age related macular degeneration as well. Medicines including inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system (converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers and renin inhibitors), statins, acetylsalicylic acid, trimetazidin, third generation beta-blockers, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists, folate, vitamin D, melatonin, advanced glycation end-product crosslink breaker alagebrium, endothelin-receptor antagonist bosentan, coenzyme Q10; "causal" antioxidant vitamins, N-acetyl-cysteine, resveratrol, L-arginine, serotonin receptor agonists, tumor necrosis factor-alpha blockers, specific inhibitor of the complement alternative pathway, curcumin and doxycyclin all have beneficial effects on endothelial dysfunction. Restoration of endothelial dysfunction can restabilize chronic vascular disease including age-related macular degeneration as well. Considering that the human vascular system is consubstantial, medicines listed above should be given to patients (1) who have no macular degeneration but have risk factors for the disease and are older than 50 years; (2) who have been diagnosed with unilateral age-related macular degeneration in order to prevent damage of the contralateral eye; (3) who have bilateral age-related macular degeneration in order to avert deterioration and in the hope of a potential improvement. However, randomised prospective clinical trials are still needed to elucidate the potential role of these drug treatments in the prevention and treatment of age-related macular degeneration.
To evaluate the efficacy of intravitreal aflibercept therapy using a treat-and-extend regimen on treatment-naïve pachychoroid neovasculopathy (PNV) and Type 1 neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
We retrospectively studied 42 eyes with PNV and 60 eyes with Type 1 neovascular AMD. We assessed best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central macular thickness (CMT), central choroidal thickness (CCT), and total number of injections over 2 years.
The BCVA and CMT improvements during the 2-year treatment period did not differ significantly between PNV and AMD; however, CCT decreased significantly in PNV than in AMD (P<0.05). Management of PNV required significantly fewer injections than AMD during the 2-year period (P<0.05). There were no significant differences in BCVA, CMT and CCT changes between PNV with and without polypoidal lesions (28 vs. 14 eyes) during the 2 year period. Significantly fewer injections were needed for PNV with polypoidal lesions than for PNV without (P<0.01). There were no significant differences in BCVA, CMT and CCT changes, or in the number of injections during the 2-year treatment period, between AMD with and without polypoidal lesions (30 vs. 30 eyes).
Treat-and-extend regimen of intravitreal aflibercept injection may be equally effective in terms of improvement of BCVA and exudative changes both in eyes with PNV and those with Type 1 neovascular AMD requiring fewer injections for the former. Among eyes with PNV, those with polypoidal lesions needed fewer injections than those without polypoidal lesions.
Long-term intraocular injections of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-neutralising proteins can preserve central vision in many patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration. We tested the safety and tolerability of a single intravitreous injection of an AAV2 vector expressing the VEGF-neutralising protein sFLT01 in patients with advanced neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
This was a phase 1, open-label, dose-escalating study done at four outpatient retina clinics in the USA. Patients were assigned to each cohort in order of enrolment, with the first three patients being assigned to and completing the first cohort before filling positions in the following treatment groups. Patients aged 50 years or older with neovascular age-related macular degeneration and a baseline best-corrected visual acuity score of 20/100 or less in the study eye were enrolled in four dose-ranging cohorts (cohort 1, 2 × 10<sup>8</sup> vector genomes (vg); cohort 2, 2 × 10<sup>9</sup> vg; cohort 3, 6 × 10<sup>9</sup> vg; and cohort 4, 2 × 10<sup>10</sup> vg, n=3 per cohort) and one maximum tolerated dose cohort (cohort 5, 2 × 10<sup>10</sup> vg, n=7) and followed up for 52 weeks. The primary objective of the study was to assess the safety and tolerability of a single intravitreous injection of AAV2-sFLT01, through the measurement of eye-related adverse events. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01024998.
19 patients with advanced neovascular age-related macular degeneration were enrolled in the study between May 18, 2010, and July 14, 2014. All patients completed the 52-week trial period. Two patients in cohort 4 (2 × 10<sup>10</sup> vg) experienced adverse events that were possibly study-drug related: pyrexia and intraocular inflammation that resolved with a topical steroid. Five of ten patients who received 2 × 10<sup>10</sup> vg had aqueous humour concentrations of sFLT01 that peaked at 32·7-112·0 ng/mL (mean 73·7 ng/mL, SD 30·5) by week 26 with a slight decrease to a mean of 53·2 ng/mL at week 52 (SD 17·1). At baseline, four of these five patients were negative for anti-AAV2 serum antibodies and the fifth had a very low titre (1:100) of anti-AAV2 antibodies, whereas four of the five non-expressers of sFLT01 had titres of 1:400 or greater. In 11 of 19 patients with intraretinal or subretinal fluid at baseline judged to be reversible, six showed substantial fluid reduction and improvement in vision, whereas five showed no fluid reduction. One patient in cohort 5 showed a large decrease in vision between weeks 26 and 52 that was not thought to be vector-related.
Intravitreous injection of AAV2-sFLT01 seemed to be safe and well tolerated at all doses. Additional studies are needed to identify sources of variability in expression and anti-permeability activity, including the potential effect of baseline anti-AAV2 serum antibodies.
Sanofi Genzyme, Framingham, MA, USA.
Visual impairment in elderly people is a considerable health problem that significantly affects quality of life of millions worldwide. The magnitude of this issue is becoming more evident with an aging population and an increasing number of older individuals.
The objective of this article was to review the clinical and pathological aspects of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), diagnostic tools, and therapeutic modalities presently available or underway for both atrophic and wet forms of the disease.
An online review of the PubMed database was performed, searching for the key words. The search was limited to articles published since 1980 to date.
Several risk factors have been linked to AMD, such as age (>60 years), lifestyle (smoking and diet), and family history. Although the pathogenesis of AMD remains unclear, genetic factors have been implicated in the condition. Treatment for atrophic AMD is mainly close observation, coupled with nutritional supplements such as zinc and antioxidants, whereas treatment of wet AMD is based on targeting choroidal neovascular membranes.
Identification of modifiable risk factors would improve the possibilities of preventing the progression of AMD. The role of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents has transformed the therapeutic approach of the potentially blinding disease "wet AMD" into a more favorable outcome.
It has a great therapeutic significance that the disorder of the vascular endothelium, which supplies the affected ocular structures, plays a major role in the development of age-related macular degeneration. Chronic inflammation is closely linked to diseases associated with endothelial dysfuncition and age-related macular degeneration is accompanied by a general inflammatory response. The vascular wall including those in chorioids may be activated by several repeated and/or prolonged mechanical, physical, chemical, microbiological, immunologic and genetic factors causing a protracted host defence response with a consequent vascular damage, which leads to age-related macular degeneration. Based on this concept, age-related macular degeneration is a local manifestation of the systemic vascular disease. This recognition should have therapeutic implications because restoration of endothelial dysfunction can stabilize the condition of chronic vascular disease including age-related macular degeneration, as well. Restoration of endothelial dysfunction by non-pharmacological or pharmacological interventions may prevent the development or improve endothelial dysfunction resulting in prevention or improvement of age-related macular degeneration. Non-pharmacological interventions which may have beneficial effect in endothelial dysfunction include (1) smoking cessation; (2) reduction of increased body weight; (3) adequate physical activity; (4) appropriate diet (a) proper dose of flavonoids, polyphenols and kurcumin; (b) omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids: docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid; (c) carotenoids, lutein and zeaxanthins), (d) management of dietary glycemic index, (e) caloric restriction, and (5) elimination of stressful lifestyle. Non-pharmacological interventions should be preferable even if medicaments are also used for the treatment of endothelial dysfunction.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of vision loss in the elderly. AMD is diagnosed based on characteristic retinal findings in individuals older than 50. Early detection and treatment are critical in increasing the likelihood of retaining good and functional vision. 
Our purpose was to evaluate the relationship between subfoveal choroidal thickness (SCT) and development of macular atrophy (MA) in eyes with age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
This was a prospective, multicenter study. Sixty participants (120 eyes) in the TREX-AMD trial (NCT01648292) with treatment-naïve neovascular AMD (NVAMD) in at least one eye were included. SCT was measured by certified reading center graders at baseline using spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SDOCT). The baseline SCT was correlated with the presence of MA at baseline and development of incident MA by month 18. Generalized estimating equations were used to account for information from both eyes.
Baseline SCT in eyes with MA was statistically significantly less than in those without MA in both the dry AMD (DAMD) (P = 0.04) and NVAMD (P = 0.01) groups. Comparison of baseline SCT between MA developers and non-MA developers revealed a statistically significant difference (P = 0.03). Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis showed the cut-off threshold of SCT for predicting the development of MA in cases without MA at baseline was 124 μm (AUC = 0.772; Sensitivity = 0.923; Specificity = 0.5). Among eyes without MA at baseline, those with baseline SCT ≤124 μm were 4.3 times more likely to develop MA (Odds ratio: 4.3, 95% confidence interval: 1.6-12, P = 0.005) than those with baseline SCT >124 μm.
Eyes with AMD and MA had less SCT than those without MA. Eyes with less baseline SCT also appear to be at higher risk to develop MA within 18 months.
Current treatments for choroidal neovascularization, a major cause of blindness for patients with age-related macular degeneration, treat symptoms but not the underlying causes of the disease. Inflammation has been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of choroidal neovascularization. We examined the inflammatory role of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in age-related macular degeneration. TLR2 was robustly expressed by the retinal pigment epithelium in mouse and human eyes, both normal and with macular degeneration/choroidal neovascularization. Nuclear localization of NF-κB, a major downstream target of TLR2 signaling, was detected in the retinal pigment epithelium of human eyes, particularly in eyes with advanced stages of age-related macular degeneration. TLR2 antagonism effectively suppressed initiation and growth of spontaneous choroidal neovascularization in a mouse model, and the combination of anti-TLR2 and antivascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 yielded an additive therapeutic effect on both area and number of spontaneous choroidal neovascularization lesions. Finally, in primary human fetal retinal pigment epithelium cells, ligand binding to TLR2 induced robust expression of proinflammatory cytokines, and end products of lipid oxidation had a synergistic effect on TLR2 activation. Our data illustrate a functional role for TLR2 in the pathogenesis of choroidal neovascularization, likely by promoting inflammation of the retinal pigment epithelium, and validate TLR2 as a novel therapeutic target for reducing choroidal neovascularization.
To describe the morphologic characteristics of the vitreomacular interface in intermediate age-related macular degeneration associated with tangential traction due to premacular membrane formation and to correlate with optical coherence tomography (OCT) findings and clinical data.
Premacular membrane specimens were removed sequentially with the internal limiting membrane from 27 eyes of 26 patients with intermediate age-related macular degeneration during standard vitrectomy. Specimens were processed for immunocytochemical staining of epiretinal cells and extracellular matrix components. Ultrastructural analysis was performed using transmission electron microscopy. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography images and patient charts were evaluated in retrospect.
Immunocytochemistry revealed hyalocytes and myofibroblasts as predominant cell types. Ultrastructural analysis demonstrated evidence of vitreoschisis in all eyes. Myofibroblasts with contractile properties were observed to span between folds of the internal limiting membrane and vitreous cortex collagen. Retinal pigment epithelial cells or inflammatory cells were not detected. Mean visual acuity (Snellen) showed significant improvement from 20/72 ± 20/36 to 20/41 ± 20/32 (P < 0.001) after a mean follow-up period of 19 months (median, 17 months). During this period, none of the eyes required anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy.
Fibrocellular premacular proliferation in intermediate age-related macular degeneration predominantly consists of vitreous collagen, hyalocytes, and myofibroblasts with contractile properties. Vitreoschisis and vitreous-derived cells appear to play an important role in traction formation of this subgroup of eyes. In patients with intermediate age-related macular degeneration and contractile premacular membrane, release of traction by vitrectomy with internal limiting membrane peeling results in significantly functional and anatomical improvement.
To investigate the relationship of the pre-anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) retinal tissue area (RTA) and optical density (ODRT) of the retinal optical slice portion located in the central subfield, and their ratio (RTA/ODRT), in the presence of diabetic macular edema or of inraretinal cystic fluid in neovascular age-related macular degeneration, to central retinal thickness and best-corrected visual acuity after anti-VEGF treatment with ME resolution.
The optical coherence tomography images and medical records of 33 patients (41 eyes) with neovascular age-related macular degeneration, 15 (21 eyes) with diabetic macular edema and 9 healthy individuals (15 eyes) were retrospectively analyzed. RTA, ODRT, and RTA/ODRT were calculated on pre-anti-VEGF B-scan images. Spearman rank correlation was used to assess the relationship of central retinal thickness and best-corrected visual acuity after anti-VEGF treatment with the variables under study.
Pre-anti-VEGF RTA was positively correlated with post-anti-VEGF central retinal thickness (ρ = 0.76; P < 0.001) and best-corrected visual acuity (ρ = 0.67; P < 0.001), whereas pre-anti-VEGF ODRT was moderately negatively correlated (ρ = -0.26; P = 0.049 and ρ = -0.48; P = 0.001, respectively) and pre-anti-VEGF RTA/ODRT ratio was strongly positively correlated (ρ = 0.75; P < 0.001 and ρ = 0.85; P < 0.001, respectively). The area under curve for RTA/ODRT ratio was 0.93 (P < 0.001), and the cut-off value for post-anti-VEGF LogMAR best-corrected visual acuity of 0.4 (20/50 Snellen equivalent) or worse was 1,406.7 μm/U (sensitivity: 0.94; specificity: 0.78).
Both RTA and ODRT, or, preferably, RTA/ODRT ratio alone can be used as predictors of functional and anatomic outcomes in patients with diabetic macular edema or neovascular age-related macular degeneration treated with anti-VEGF therapy.
To assess the evolution of macular pigment optical density (MPOD) following supplementation with various macular formulations obtained with the Visucam<sup>®</sup> 200, and to study the factors affecting MPOD measurements.
In this prospective, randomized, double-masked multicenter study, patients were divided into 2 groups: group A (patients without retinal pathology who underwent cataract surgery 1 month previously) and group B (patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration [AMD] in one eye). In each group, half of the patients were randomly assigned to receive a food supplementation either with or without carotenoids (5mg of Lutein and 1mg of Zeaxanthin). Outcome measures included MPOD responses obtained with the Visucam<sup>®</sup> 200 for one year.
In total, 126 subjects (52 men, 74 women) with a mean age of 75.3±7.61 years were enrolled. Mean MPOD values at the time of inclusion were statistically lower in group A (0.088 density unit [DU]) compared to group B (0.163 DU, P<0.05). No statistically significant increase in MPOD was noted in either group, even after discontinuation of the supplementation. By multiple regression analysis, age, female gender, lens status and the presence of AMD seemed to significantly affect MPOD measurements.
No significant improvement in MPOD seems to be detected with the Visucam<sup>®</sup> 200 after carotenoid supplementation. The MPOD measurement seems to be highly affected by cataract extraction and the presence of AMD.
This meta-analysis reports on current estimates of the prevalence of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) based on a review of recent meta-analyses and literature research. Within an age of 45-85 years, global prevalences of any AMD, early AMD, and late AMD were 8.7% [95% credible interval (CrI), 4.3‒17.4], 8.0% (95% CrI, 4.0‒15.5), and 0.4% (95% CrI, 0.2-0.8). Early AMD was more common in individuals of European ancestry (11.2%) than in Asians (6.8%), whereas prevalence of late AMD did not differ significantly. AMD of any type was less common in individuals of African ancestry. The number of individuals with AMD was estimated to be 196 million (95% CrI, 140‒261) in 2020 and 288 million (95% CrI, 205‒399) in 2040. The worldwide number of persons blind (presenting visual acuity < 3/60) or with moderate to severe vision impairment (MSVI; presenting visual acuity < 6/18 to 3/60 inclusive) due to macular disease in 2010 was 2.1 million [95% uncertainty interval (UI), 1.9‒2.7] individuals out of 32.4 million individuals blind and 6.0 million (95% UI, 5.2‒8.1) persons out of 191 million people with MSVI. Age-standardized prevalence of macular diseases as cause of blindness in adults aged 50+ years worldwide decreased from 0.2% (95% UI, 0.2‒0.2) in 1990 to 0.1% (95% UI, 0.1‒0.2) in 2010; as cause for MSVI, it remained mostly unchanged (1990: 0.4%; 95% UI, 0.3‒0.5; 2010: 0.4%; 95% UI, 0.4‒0.6), with no significant sex difference. In 2015, AMD was the fourth most common cause of blindness globally (in approximately 5.8% of blind individuals) and third most common cause for MSVI (3.9%). These data show the globally increasing importance of AMD.
The wall of blood vessels including those in choroids may be harmed by several repeated and/or prolonged mechanical, physical, chemical, microbiological, immunologic, and genetic impacts (risk factors), which may trigger a protracted response, the so-called host defense response. As a consequence, pathological changes resulting in vascular injury (e. g. atherosclerosis, age-related macular degeneration) may be evolved. Risk factors can also act directly on the endothelium through an increased production of reactive oxygen species promoting an endothelial activation, which leads to endothelial dysfunction, the onset of vascular disease. Thus, endothelial dysfunction is a link between the harmful stimulus and vascular injury; any kind of harmful stimuli may trigger the defensive chain that results in inflammation that may lead to vascular injury. It has been shown that even early age-related macular degeneration is associated with the presence of diffuse arterial disease and patients with early age-related macular degeneration demonstrate signs of systemic and retinal vascular alterations. Chronic inflammation, a feature of AMD, is tightly linked to diseases associated with ED: AMD is accompanied by a general inflammatory response, in the form of complement system activation, similar to that observed in degenerative vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis. All these facts indicate that age-related macular degeneration may be a vascular disease (or part of a systemic vasculopathy). This recognition could have therapeutic implications because restoration of endothelial dysfunction may prevent the development or improve vascular disease resulting in prevention or improvement of age-related macular degeneration as well.
Osteoarthritis is the leading cause of total hip replacement, accounting for more than 80% of all total hip replacements. Emerging evidence suggests that osteoarthritis has a chronic inflammatory component to its pathogenesis similar to age-related macular degeneration. We evaluated the association between age-related macular degeneration and total hip replacement as proxy for severe osteoarthritis or fractured neck of femur in the Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study. 20,744 participants had complete data on both age-related macular degeneration assessed from colour fundus photographs taken during 2003-2007 and total hip replacement. Total hip replacements due to hip osteoarthritis and fractured neck of femur during 2001-2011 were identified by linking the cohort records to the Australian Orthopedic Association National Joint Replacement Registry. Logistic regression was used to examine the association between age-related macular degeneration and risk of total hip replacement due to osteoarthritis and fracture separately, adjusted for confounders. There were 791 cases of total hip replacement for osteoarthritis and 102 cases of total hip replacement due to fractured neck of femur. After adjustment for age, sex, body mass index, smoking, and grouped country of birth, intermediate age-related macular degeneration was directly associated with total hip replacement for osteoarthritis (odds ratio 1.22, 95% CI 1.00-1.49). Late age-related macular degeneration was directly associated with total hip replacement due to fractured neck of femur (odds ratio 5.21, 95% CI2.25-12.02). The association between intermediate age-related macular degeneration and an increased 10-year incidence of total hip replacement due to osteoarthritis suggests the possibility of similar inflammatory processes underlying both chronic diseases. The association of late age-related macular degeneration with an increased 10-year incidence of total hip replacement due to fractured neck of femur may be due to an increased prevalence of fractures in those with poor central vision associated with the late complications of age-related macular degeneration. 
Utility of visual impairment caused by amblyopia is important for the cost-effectiveness of screening for amblyopia (lazy eye, prevalence 3-3.5 %). We previously measured decrease of utility in 35-year-old persons with unilateral persistent amblyopia. The current observational case-control study aimed to measure loss of utility in patients with amblyopia with recent decrease of vision in their better eye. As these patients are rare, the sample was supplemented by patients with bilateral age-related macular degeneration with similar decrease of vision.
From our out-patient department, two groups of patients with recent deterioration to bilateral visual acuity less than Snellen 0.5 (bilateral visual impairment, BVI) were recruited, with either persistent amblyopia and age-related macular degeneration (AMB + AMD), or with bilateral age-related macular degeneration (BAMD). To measure utility, the time trade-off method and the standard gamble method were applied through interviews. Correlations were sought between utility values and visual acuity, age and Visual Function Questionnaire-25 scores.
Seventeen AMB + AMD patients (mean age 72.9 years), and 63 BAMD patients (mean age 79.6 years) were included in the study. Among AMB + AMD, 80 % were willing to trade lifetime in exchange for cure. The overall mean time trade-off utility was 0.925. Among BAMD, 75 % were willing to trade, utility was 0.917. Among AMB + AMD, 38 % accepted risk of death in exchange for cure, overall mean standard gamble utility was 0.999. Among BAMD, 49 % accepted risk of death, utility was 0.998. Utility was not related to visual acuity but it was to age (p = 0.02).
Elderly patients with BVI, caused by persistent amblyopia and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) or by bilateral AMD, had an approximately 8 % loss of TTO utility. Notably, the 8 % loss in elderly with BVI differs little from the 3.7 % loss we found previously in 35-year-old persons with unilateral amblyopia with good vision in the other eye. The moderate impact of BVI in senescence could be explained by adaptation, comorbidity, avoidance of risk and a changed percept of cure.
To analyze the correlation between the E318D rs9332739 polymorphism of the C2 complement factor; R102G rs2230199 polymorphism of the C3 complement factor as well as the Y402H rs1061170 polymorphism of the CFH complement factor and risk of AMD as well as the response to anti-VEGF therapy.
106 patients with age-related macular degeneration treated with intravitreal ranibizumab or bevacizumab were enrolled. The response to treatment was assessed at 4 weeks intervals for 6 months and was based on the results of best corrected visual acuity and central retinal thickness measurements compared to the respective baseline values. The control group consisted of 58 healthy volunteers. The testing was performed using genetic probes (TaqMan Applied Biosystems) in all cases
E318D (C2) and R102G (C3) polymorphisms were not associated with age-related macular degeneration. The genotype CC of Y402H (CFH) polymorphism was more frequent in patients with age-related macular degeneration as compared to controls [OR=3.09 (1.28–7.49); p=0.0069]. At the last follow-up, patients with age-related macular degeneration positive for the CC rs1061170 CFH genotype presented with worse best corrected visual acuity and increased central retinal thickness as compared to their counterparts negative for this genotype [OR=7.67 (1.77–33.12), p=0.0052]. Among 25.47% of “non-responders”, the CC rs1061170 CFH genotype was present in 51.8% of cases. In patients with the TT rs1061170 CFH genotype the final best corrected visual acuity was better and a significant reduction of central retinal thickness was demonstrated in all those cases, as compared to subjects with the CC rs1061170 CFH genotype [OR=0.31 (0.11-0.84), p=0.0194].
The study showed that the CC rs1061170 CFH genotype may be associated with the age-related macular degeneration. Additionally, the CC rs1061170 CFH genotype may promote a negative response to anti-VEGF treatment, while patients with the TT rs1061170 CFH genotype showed better functional and structural response to anti-VEGF agents.
To analyze predictors and develop predictive models of anatomic outcome in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) treated with as-needed ranibizumab after 4 years of follow-up.
A multicenter consecutive case series non-interventional study was performed. Clinical, funduscopic and OCT characteristics of 194 treatment-naïve patients with AMD treated with as-needed ranibizumab for at least 2 years and up to 4 years were analyzed at baseline, 3 months and each year until the end of the follow-up. Baseline demographic and angiographic characteristics were also evaluated. R Statistical Software was used for statistical analysis. Main outcome measure was final anatomic status.
Factors associated with less probability of preserved macula were diagnosis in 2009, older age, worse vision, presence of atrophy/fibrosis, pigment epithelium detachment, and geographic atrophy/fibrotic scar/neovascular AMD in the fellow eye. Factors associated with higher probability of GA were presence of atrophy and greater number of injections, whereas male sex, worse vision, lesser change in central macular thickness and presence of fibrosis were associated with less probability of GA as final macular status. Predictive model of preserved macula vs. GA/fibrotic scar showed sensibility of 77.78% and specificity of 69.09%. Predictive model of GA vs. fibrotic scar showed sensibility of 68.89% and specificity of 72.22%.
We identified predictors of final macular status, and developed two predictive models. Predictive models that we propose are based on easily harvested variables, and, if validated, could be a useful tool for individual patient management and clinical research studies.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible central vision loss in developed countries. With the aging of population, AMD will become globally an increasingly important and prevalent disease worldwide. It is a complex disease whose etiology is associated with both genetic and environmental risk factors. An extensive decline in the quality of life and progressive need of daily living assistance resulting from AMD among those most severely affected highlights the essential role of preventive strategies, particularly advising patients to quit smoking. In addition, maintaining a healthy diet, controlling other risk factors (such as hypertension, obesity, and atherosclerosis), and the use of nutritional supplements (antioxidants) are recommendable. Genetic testing may be especially important in patients with a family history of AMD. Recently, unifying criteria for the clinical classification of AMD, defining no apparent aging changes; normal aging changes; and early, intermediate, and late AMD stages, are of value in predicting AMD risk of progression and in establishing recommendations for the diagnosis, therapeutic approach, and follow-up of patients. The present review is focused on early and intermediate AMD and presents a description of the clinical characteristics and ophthalmological findings for these stages, together with algorithms for the diagnosis and management of patients, which are easily applicable in daily clinical practice.
In recent years, the relationship between vitamin D and health has received growing attention from the scientific and medical communities. Vitamin D deficiencies have been repeatedly associated with various acute and chronic diseases, including age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Its active metabolite, 1α,25-dihydoxy vitamin D, acts as a modulator of cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, and cumulative data from experimental and observational studies suggest that relatively a lower vitamin D status could be a potential risk factor for the development of early and/or late AMD. Herein, we made a narrative review of the mechanisms linking a potential role of vitamin D with the current concepts of AMD pathophysiology.
To evaluate the 24-month natural course of visual changes in patients discontinuing treatment despite persistent or recurrent fluid and factors predictive of visual prognosis.
This retrospective, observational study included 35 patients (35 eyes) who initially received anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD), but discontinued treatment despite persistent or recurrent fluid. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at treatment discontinuation was determined and compared with the 24-month BCVA, which was then compared between polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy and other neovascular age-related macular degeneration subtypes. Baseline characteristics predictive of visual outcome and the degree of visual change were also analyzed.
The mean number of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections before treatment discontinuation was 4.0 ± 1.6. The mean logarithm of minimal angle of resolution of BCVA at treatment discontinuation and that at 24 months were 1.02 ± 0.20 (Snellen equivalents = 20/209) and 1.60 ± 0.56 (20/796), respectively (P < 0.001). The 24-month BCVA was not different between polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy and other neovascular age-related macular degeneration subtypes (P = 0.803). The type of fluid (intraretinal fluid vs. no intraretinal fluid) was predictive of 24-month BCVA (P = 0.004) and the degree of changes in BCVA (P = 0.043).
Marked deterioration in visual acuity was noted in patients discontinuing treatment, regardless of neovascular age-related macular degeneration subtypes. The presence of intraretinal fluid was associated with worse visual prognosis, suggesting that patients with intraretinal fluid should be strongly warned about their poor prognosis before they decide to discontinue treatment.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and pyroptosis cause irreversible vascular changes in the eyes leading to central vision loss in patients. It is the most common eye disease affecting millions of people aged 50years or older, and is slowly becoming a major health problem worldwide. The disease mainly affects macula lutea, an oval-shaped pigmented area surrounding fovea near the center of retina, a region responsible for visual acuity. It is fairly a complex disease as genetics of patients, environmental triggers as well as risk factors such as age, family history of CVDs, diabetes, gender, obesity, race, hyperopia, iris color, smoking, diabetes, exposure to sun light and pyroptosis have all been clubbed together as probable causes of macular degeneration. Among genes that are known to play a role include variant polymorphisms in the complement cascade components such as CFH, C2, C3, and CFB as potential genetic risk factors. So far, AMD disease hypothesized theories have not resulted into the anticipated impact towards the development of effective or preventive therapies in order to help alleviate patients' suffering because, as of today, it is still unclear what actually initiates or leads to this dreaded eye condition. Based upon our extensive work on the metabolism of homocysteine (Hcy) in various disease conditions we, therefore, are proposing a novel hypothesis for AMD pathogenesis as we strongly believe that Hcy and events such as pyroptosis make a greater contribution to the overall etiology of AMD disease in a target population of susceptible hosts by inciting and accelerating the inherent inflammatory changes in the retina of these patients (Fig. 2). In this context, we further state that Hcy and pyroptosis should be considered as legitimate and valuable markers of retinal dysfunction as they not only aid and abet in the development but also in the progression of AMD in older people as discussed in this paper. This discussion should open up new avenues in tackling inflammatory and pyroptosis centered pathways that are up-regulated or solely promoted by Hcy interaction within the ocular compartment of AMD susceptible hosts.
Age-related eye disease is often considered part of natural aging. Lack of awareness of eye conditions can result in missed treatment. We investigated the rates of awareness of cataract and age-related macular degeneration, the most common age-related eye-diseases, and the associated factors among elderly Koreans.
We identified 7,403 study subjects (≥40 years old) with cataract or age-related macular degeneration based on ophthalmic examination results during the 5th Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey conducted between 2010 and 2012. We assessed whether patients were aware of their eye condition based on a previous diagnosis by a physician.
The average awareness rate over the 3-year study period was 23.69% in subjects with cataract and 1.45% in subjects with age-related macular degeneration. Logistic regression analysis showed that patients with cataract were more likely to recognize their condition if they had myopia (odds ratio, 2.08), hyperopia (odds ratio, 1.33), family history of eye disease (odds ratio, 1.44), or a past eye examination (odds ratio, 4.07-29.10). The presence of diabetes mellitus was also a significant predictor of patient awareness of cataract (odds ratio, 1.88).
Poor patient recognition of eye disease among the Korean elderly highlights the seriousness of this potential public health problem in our aging society. Pre-existing eye-related conditions and diabetes were significant predictors of awareness; therefore, patients in frequent contact with their doctors have a greater chance of detecting eye disease.
Non-exudative age-related macular degeneration, a prevalent cause of blindness, is a progressive and degenerative disease characterized by alterations in Bruch's membrane, retinal pigment epithelium, and photoreceptors exclusively localized in the macula. Although experimental murine models exist, the vast majority take a long time to develop retinal alterations and, in general, these alterations are ubiquitous, with many resulting from non-eye-specific genetic manipulations; additionally, most do not always reproduce the hallmarks of human age-related macular degeneration. Choroid vessels receive sympathetic innervation from the superior cervical ganglion, which, together with the parasympathetic system, regulates blood flow into the choroid. Choroid blood flow changes have been involved in age-related macular degeneration development and progression. At present, no experimental models take this factor into account. The aim of this work was to analyze the effect of superior cervical gangliectomy (also known as ganglionectomy) on the choroid, Bruch's membrane, retinal pigment epithelium and retina. Adult male C57BL/6J mice underwent unilateral superior cervical gangliectomy and a contralateral sham procedure. Although superior cervical gangliectomy induced ubiquitous choroid and choriocapillaris changes, it induced Bruch's membrane thickening, loss of retinal pigment epithelium melanin content and retinoid isomerohydrolase, the appearance of drusen-like deposits, and retinal pigment epithelium and photoreceptor atrophy, exclusively localized in the temporal side. Moreover, superior cervical gangliectomy provoked a localized increase in retinal pigment epithelium and photoreceptor apoptosis, and a decline in photoreceptor electroretinographic function. Therefore, superior cervical gangliectomy recapitulated the main features of human non-exudative age-related macular degeneration, and could become a new experimental model of dry age-related macular degeneration, and a useful platform for developing new therapies.
Inflammation is an adaptive response of the immune system to noxious insults to maintain homeostasis and restore functionality. The retina is considered an immune-privileged tissue as a result of its unique anatomic and physiologic properties. During aging, the retina suffers from a low-grade chronic oxidative insult, which sustains for decades and increases in level with advancing age. As a result, the retinal innate-immune system, particularly microglia and the complement system, undergoes low levels of activation (parainflammation). In many cases, this parainflammatory response can maintain homeostasis in the healthy aging eye. However, in patients with age-related macular degeneration, this parainflammatory response becomes dysregulated and contributes to macular damage. Factors contributing to the dysregulation of age-related retinal parainflammation include genetic predisposition, environmental risk factors, and old age. Dysregulated parainflammation (chronic inflammation) in age-related macular degeneration damages the blood retina barrier, resulting in the breach of retinal-immune privilege, leading to the development of retinal lesions. This review discusses the basic principles of retinal innate-immune responses to endogenous chronic insults in normal aging and in age-related macular degeneration and explores the difference between beneficial parainflammation and the detrimental chronic inflammation in the context of age-related macular degeneration. 
Vitamin D may be involved in ocular function in older adults, but there is no current consensus on a possible association between circulating concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD) and the occurrence of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Our objective was to systematically review and quantitatively assess the association of circulating 25OHD concentration with AMD. A Medline search was conducted in November 2015, with no date limit, using the MeSH terms "Vitamin D" OR "Vitamin D deficiency" OR "Ergocalciferols" OR 'Cholecalciferol' combined with "Age-related macular degeneration" OR "Macular degeneration" OR "Retinal degeneration" OR "Macula lutea" OR "Retina". Fixed and random-effects meta-analyses were performed to compute (i) standard mean difference in 25OHD concentration between AMD and non-AMD patients; (ii) AMD risk according to circulating 25OHD concentration. Of the 243 retrieved studies, 11 observational studies-10 cross-sectional studies and 1 cohort study-met the selection criteria. The number of participants ranged from 65 to 17,045 (52-100% women), and the number with AMD ranged from 31 to 1440. Circulating 25OHD concentration was 15% lower in AMD compared with non-AMD on average. AMD was inversely associated with the highest 25OHD quintile compared with the lowest (summary odds ratio (OR)=0.83 [95%CI:0.71-0.97]), notably late AMD (summary OR=0.47 [95%CI:0.28-0.79]). Circulating 25OHD<50nmol/L was also associated with late-stage AMD (summary OR=2.18 [95%CI:1.34-3.56]), an association that did not persist when all categories of AMD were considered (summary OR=1.26 [95%CI:0.90-1.76]). In conclusion, this meta-analysis provides evidence that high 25OHD concentrations may be protective against AMD, and that 25OHD concentrations below 50nmol/L are associated with late AMD. 
Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) is the first choice of treatment for age-related macular degeneration. However, quite a few eyes treated using conventional dose anti-VEGF (CDAV) have persistent pigment epithelial detachment (PED) on optical coherence tomography. This study investigated the efficacy and safety of high dose anti-VEGF (HDAV) for refractory PED.
In this retrospective study, 31 eyes of neovascular age-related macular degeneration patients with persistent PED findings despite six or more intravitreal injections of CDAV (bevacizumab 1.25 mg or ranibizumab 2.5 mg) were analyzed. Changes in visual outcome, central foveal thickness, and PED height were compared before and after HDAV (bevacizumab 5.0 mg) for these refractory PED cases.
The mean age of patients was 67.7 years. The number of CDAV injections was 12.1. The number of HDAV injections was 3.39. Best-corrected visual acuity in logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution before and after HDAV was 0.49 and 0.41 (p < 0.001), respectively. Central foveal thickness before and after HDAV was 330.06 and 311.10 µm (p = 0.125), respectively. PED height before and after HDAV was 230.28 and 204.07 µm (p = 0.014), respectively. There were no serious adverse reactions in all the eyes.
Increasing the dose of bevacizumab in refractory PED may be a possible treatment option.
In age-related macular degeneration (AMD), stem cells could possibly replace or regenerate disrupted pathologic retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), and produce supportive growth factors and cytokines such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor.  Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)-derived RPE was first subretinally transplanted in a neovascular AMD patient in 2014. Areas covered: Induced PSCs are derived from the introduction of transcription factors to adult cells under specific cell culture conditions, followed by differentiation into RPE cells. Induced PSC-derived RPE cells exhibit ion transport, membrane potential, polarized VEGF secretion and gene expression that is similar to native RPE. Despite having similar in vitro function, morphology, immunostaining and microscopic analysis, it remains to be seen if iPSC-derived RPE can replicate the myriad of in vivo functions, including immunomodulatory effects, of native RPE cells.  Historically, adjuvant RPE transplantation during CNV resections were technically difficult and complicated by immune rejection. Autologous iPSCs are hypothesized to reduce the risk of immune rejection, but their production is time-consuming and expensive.  Alternatively, allogenic transplantation using human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched iPSCs, similar to HLA-matched organ transplantation, is currently being investigated. Expert opinion: Challenges to successful transplantation with iPSCs include surgical technique, a pathologic subretinal microenvironment, possible immune rejection, and complications of immunosuppression.
Age-related macular degeneration is the leading cause of irreversible central vision impairment in people aged over 50 in developed countries. Age-related macular degeneration is a complex disease derived from environmental, immune and genetic factors. The complement pathway has been implicated in the pathogenesis of many diseases. Recently, variants in several genes, such as complement H (CFH), complement factor B (CFB), complement 2 (C2), and complement 3 (C3), encoding complement pathway proteins, have been identified as associated with age-related macular degeneration. However, the associations between these genes and age-related macular degeneration varied due to genetic variation within populations and various ethnics groups. The strongest association was found between the age-related macular degeneration and SNP Y402H rs 1061170 variant of CFH gene, which is present in 30% to 50% of age-related macular degeneration patients in Caucasian population and which is a risk factor for the development of age-related macular degeneration. Cohort studies showed that polymorphism Arg102Gly (SNP rs 2230199) of C3 protein could serve as a high-risk genetic marker for the development of age-related macular degeneration. Other rare variants of C3 (Lys155Gln, Lys65Gln, Arg735Trp, Ser1619Arg), may also be associated with a high incidence of age-related macular degeneration in some ethnic groups. A protective haplotype of variants E318D and IVS10 in the C2 gene as well as L9H and R320 in the BF were associated with age-related macular degeneration but only in Caucasians. The genetic findings in age-related macular degeneration patients stress the importance of detailed phenotyping to identify age-related macular degeneration subtypes, which may be associated with the presence of different polymorphisms and various environmental risk factors in any population. Further studies may be helpful to improve the effectiveness of prophylaxis and therapeutic options in age-related macular degeneration oatients.
To investigate reticular pseudodrusen (RPD) as a potential baseline factor predictive of a poor 1-year response to intravitreal ranibizumab in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Retrospective, monocentric case series including 98 consecutive naive neovascular age-related macular degeneration patients. Presence of RPD was assessed by two graders based on color, blue-light, fundus autofluorescence pictures, and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography. A correlation between the presence of RPD and the visual change was investigated. Other baseline characteristics studied in a monovariate and multivariate analysis were the following: age, gender, affected side, loading dose, type of neovascularization, presence of retinal pigment epithelial detachment >250 μm, subretinal or intraretinal fluid, blood over >50% of the lesion, and subfoveal choroidal thickness.
The presence of RPD was not associated with a visual change (P = 0.96), but with a thin subfoveal choroidal thickness at baseline (P < 0.0001). The monovariate analysis showed that the presence of blood at baseline was associated with visual gain (P = 0.007).
The presence of RPD at baseline was not identified as a factor associated with a poor 1-year response to ranibizumab in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Studies with a longer follow-up may be needed to assess the impact of RPD on the visual prognosis of eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and the risk factors in the residents aged ≥50 years in Hainan Province.
Random sampling was carried out in four separated cities in Hainan Province in 2015. All the subjects accomplished the standard questionnaire and ocular examinations. The diagnosis of AMD was performed based on the criteria proposed by Beckman Initiative for Macular Research Classification Committee.
Three hundred and fifty-seven subjects (15.6%) were diagnosed with AMD, including 267 (11.7%) of early AMD, 64 (2.80%) of intermediate AMD and 24 (1.1%) of late AMD, respectively. The factors associated with the prevalence of AMD included age, educational level, smoking, outdoor activities and diet. The prevalence of AMD increased with age, lower educational level, smoking or less outdoor activities. The prevalence of AMD in those with a diet of meat or eggs was higher compared with a diet of vegetables or fish. The prevalence of early, intermediate and late AMD in the aged population in Hainan Province was 11.7, 2.8 and 1.1%, respectively.
Age and smoking were the risk factors for AMD, while the educational level and outdoor activities were the protective factors. Early AMD mostly occurred in those aged 50-59 years and 60-69 years, while intermediate and late AMD occurred in 70-79 years and older than 80 years.
Infiltrating immune cells including monocytes/macrophages have been implicated in the pathogenesis of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD). The aim of this study was to investigate the cytokine and chemokine expression and secretion profile of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from nAMD patients and the relationship between the cytokine/chemokine expression profile and clinical phenotype of nAMD, including macular fibrosis, macular atrophy or the responsiveness to anti-VEGF therapy.
One hundred sixty-one nAMD patients and 43 controls were enrolled in this study. nAMD patients were divided into subgroups based on the presence/absence of (1) macular atrophy, (2) macular fibrosis and (3) responsiveness to anti-VEGF therapy; 25-30 ml of peripheral blood were obtained from all participants and 5 ml were used for serum collection, and the remaining were used for PBMC isolation using density gradient centrifugation. Intracellular cytokine expressions by PBMCs following phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and ionomycin stimulation were examined using flow cytometry. Cytokine productions in lipopolysaccharides (LPS)-or 1% oxygen -treated PBMC were measured using cytometric bead array (CBA) assay. In addition, cytokine and chemokine levels in the serum were also measured by CBA assay.
PBMCs from nAMD patients secreted higher levels of IL-8, CCL2 and VEGF, especially following LPS and 1% oxygen stimulation, than those from controls. 60~80% of IL-8 producing cells were CD11b<sup>+</sup>CD3<sup>-</sup> monocytes. The percentage of CD11b<sup>+</sup>CD3<sup>-</sup> IL-8<sup>+</sup> was significantly increased in nAMD patients compared to controls. PBMCs from nAMD patients without macular fibrosis produced the highest levels of IL-8 and CCL2, whilst PBMCs from nAMD patients with macular atrophy produced highest levels of VEGF. In addition, PBMCs from patients who partially responded to anti-VEGF produced higher levels of IL-8 compared to the cells from complete responders. Interestingly, serum level of CCL2 was not increased in nAMD patients although there was a trend of increased IL-8 in nAMD patients.
PBMCs, in particular monocytes, may contribute to CNV development in nAMD through secreting elevated levels of IL-8, CCL2 and VEGF after they are recruited to the macula. Apart from VEGF, IL-8 and CCL2 may be additional targets for nAMD management.
Choroidal neovascularization (CNV) is a pathogenic process of age-related macular degeneration, a vision-threatening disease. The retinal pigment epithelium and macrophages both influence CNV development. However, the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. Here, we focus on Angptl2 (angiopoietin-like protein 2), a cytokine involved in age-related systemic diseases. Angptl2 was originally identified as an adipocytokine and is also expressed in the eye. Using a laser-induced CNV model, we found thatAngptl2KO mice exhibited suppressed CNV development with reduced macrophage recruitment and inflammatory mediator induction. The mediators monocyte chemotactic protein-1, interleukin-1β (Il-1β),Il-6, matrix metalloprotease-9 (Mmp-9), and transforming growth factor-β1 (Tgf-β1) that were up-regulated during CNV development were all suppressed in the retinal pigment epithelium-choroid of CNV models generated in theAngptl2KO mice. Bone marrow transplantation using wild-type and KO mice suggested that both bone marrow-derived and host-derived Angptl2 were responsible for macrophage recruitment and CNV development. Peritoneal macrophages derived fromAngptl2KO mice expressed lower levels of the inflammatory mediators. In the wild-type peritoneal macrophages and RAW264.7 cells, Angptl2 induced the mediators via integrins α4 and β2, followed by the downstream activation of NF-κB and ERK. The activation of NF-κB and ERK by Angptl2 also promoted macrophage migration. Therefore, Angptl2 from focal tissue might trigger macrophage recruitment, and that from recruited macrophages might promote expression of inflammatory mediators including Angptl2 in an autocrine and/or paracrine fashion to facilitate CNV development. Angptl2 might therefore represent a multistep regulator of CNV pathogenesis and serve as a new therapeutic target for age-related macular degeneration. 
To test define characteristic fundus autofluorescence patterns of different exudative age-related macular degeneration subtypes.
Cross-sectional study. Fifty-two patients with choroidal neovascularization because of three different neovascular age-related macular degeneration subtypes were included in the study. Macular and peripheral fundus autofluorescence patterns of study subjects were compared in a masked fashion.
Fundus autofluorescence patterns of all three neovascular age-related macular degeneration subtypes revealed similar patterns. However, peripapillary hypo-autofluorescence was more common among patients with polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (88.2%) compared with patients with retinal angiomatous proliferation (12.5%) and patients without retinal angiomatous proliferation and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (21.1%) (P < 0.0001).
Presence of peripapillary fundus autofluorescence defects in neovascular age-related macular degeneration maybe suggestive of polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy as a variant of neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
To report research participants' baseline characteristics in the AMD2000 study, a prospective, multicenter, 5-year, observational cohort study of Japanese age-related macular degeneration (AMD). The characteristics were determined using multimodal imaging.
Patients with AMD were recruited at 18 clinical sites in Japan between April 2006 and March 2009. Each patient underwent a complete ophthalmic examination, including measurement of best-corrected visual acuity (Landolt chart), indirect ophthalmoscopy, slit-lamp biomicroscopy with a contact lens, optical coherence tomography imaging, fundus photography, and fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography.
Four hundred sixty participants (326 men [70.9%]) were included in the study. At enrollment, 131 eyes (28.5%) had hard drusen and 125 eyes (27.2%) had soft drusen in the macular area. A total of 455 eyes (98.9%) were diagnosed as having wet AMD, and 5 eyes (1.1%), as having dry AMD. Of the 455 eyes with wet AMD, 209 eyes (45.4%) had typical AMD, 228 eyes (49.6%) had polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV), and 18 eyes (3.9%) had retinal angiomatous proliferation. The size of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) was significantly smaller with indocyanine green angiography than with fluorescein angiography (P < 0.001). Poor baseline visual acuity was associated with cystoid macular edema, older age, scar, extrafoveal macular edema, subfoveal CNV, large branching vascular network, and hard exudates.
Japanese patients with AMD are predominantly male, lack drusen, and have a high rate of PCV.
To evaluate the rate of adherence to prescribed nutritional supplementation in patients affected by age-related macular degeneration, in an Italian tertiary referral tertiary center.
Patients with age-related macular degeneration, age-related eye disease study Categories 3 and 4, were recruited and underwent an 11-item questionnaire.
The study included a total of 193 patients meeting the age-related eye disease study nutritional supplementation criteria (174 patients with age-related eye disease study Category 4 and 19 with Category 3). Seventy-seven (40%) were taking oral supplementation, 70 of whom (90%) 1 tablet/day. Oral supplementation was recommended by the personal ophthalmologist in 85 patients (44%), including all those currently receiving it. Eight patients of 85 (9.4%) rejected supplementation despite it being recommended, mostly because they were already taking other medicines. Ninety-four patients (48%) claimed they had not received any information from their ophthalmologist.
Our data reveal that Italian patients with age-related eye disease study Categories 3 and 4 have a low adherence to nutritional supplementation. In 65% of cases, patients were not adequately informed by their ophthalmologist of the potential benefits of oral supplementation for age-related macular degeneration; indeed, 108 patients (56%) were not even aware such nutritional treatments are available. Ophthalmologists should be aware of the importance of giving advice to persons with age-related macular degeneration regarding the benefits of oral supplements.
To report the association of pure type 2 neovascularization (NV) in age-related macular degeneration occurring almost exclusively in patients with reticular pseudodrusen.
An observational retrospective cohort study of all eyes receiving antivascular endothelial growth factor therapy for newly diagnosed neovascular age-related macular degeneration by a single practitioner over a 6-year period. Only patients with treatment-naive, pure type 2 NV who also had either pre-neovascular imaging of the study eye or imaging of a nonneovascular fellow eye available to determine baseline characteristics including drusen type and choroidal thickness were incuded.
Of 694 patients treated for neovascular age-related macular degeneration, only 8 met the inclusion criteria with pure type 2 NV. Of these, 7 (88%) had exclusively reticular pseudodrusen (5 in the nonneovascular fellow eye, 2 in the study eye before developing NV). Six (75%) patients in the affected neovascular eye and 6 (75%) in the fellow nonneovascular eye had choroidal thickness <120 μm. Mean follow-up was 46 months (range, 3.0-63.3). Best-corrected vision improved from 20/89 (range, 20/30-20/796) at baseline to 20/60 (range, 20/20-20/399) at last follow-up.
Pure type 2 NV is rare in age-related macular degeneration, occurring almost exclusively in patients with reticular pseudodrusen and thin choroids.
To assess predictors of treatment response in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in an attempt to develop a patient-centric treatment algorithm. We conducted a systematic search using PubMed, EMBASE and Web of Science for prognostic indicators/predictive factors with the key words: 'age related macular degeneration', 'neovascular AMD', 'choroidal neovascular membrane (CNV)', 'anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF)', 'aflibercept', 'ranibizumab', 'bevacizumab', 'randomized clinical trials', 'post-hoc', 'prognostic', 'predictive', 'response' 'injection frequency, 'treat and extend (TAE), 'pro re nata (PRN)', 'bi-monthly' and 'quarterly'. We only included studies that had an adequate period of follow-up (>1 year), a single predefined treatment regimen with a predetermined re-injection criteria, an adequate number of patients, specific morphological [optical coherence tomography (OCT)] criteria that predicted final visual outcomes and injection frequency and did not include switching from one drug to the other. We were able to identify seven prospective studies and 16 retrospective studies meeting our inclusion criteria. There are several morphological and demographic prognostic indicators that can predict response to therapy in wet AMD. Smaller CNV size, subretinal fluid (SRF), retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) and response to therapy at 12 weeks (visual, angiographic or OCT) can all predict good visual outcomes in patients receiving anti-VEGF therapy. Patients with larger CNV, older age, pigment epithelial detachment (PED), intraretinal cysts (IRC) and vitreomacular adhesion (VMA) achieved less visual gains. Patients having VMA/VMT required more intensive treatment with increased treatment frequency. Patients with both posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) and SRF require infrequent injections. Patients with PED are prone to recurrences of fluid activity with a reduction in visual acuity (VA). A regimen that involves less intensive therapy and extended follow-up intervals (4 weekly) can be suggested for patients who show adequate visual response and have both SRF and PVD at baseline. In addition, patients with poor prognostic indicators such as IRC, VMA, large CNV size, older age and poor response at 12 weeks should be extended very cautiously with the possibility of fixed monthly/bimonthly (every 2 months) treatments if they fail to achieve dryness. Patients with PED at baseline should receive monthly/bimonthly injections of anti-VEGF therapy or can be extended very cautiously (two weekly intervals) using a TAE protocol.
To evaluate the efficacy and the rate of side effects of the pegylated aptamer pegaptanib in the treatment of patients with choroidal neovascularization (CNV) secondary to age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and a history of previous arterial thromboembolic events (ATEs).
Twenty-three eyes of 23 patients with subfoveal CNV due to AMD and cerebrovascular accidents (n = 12) and myocardial infarction (n = 11) in the previous 6 months received intravitreal pegaptanib 0.3 mg according to a pro re nata regimen and were followed for 12 months. The paired Student t test was used to evaluate mean changes in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA; primary outcome measure) and central foveal thickness (CFT).
The mean patient age was 71.5 ± 4.6 years; there were 14 women and 9 men. The CNV was type 1, 2, and 3 in 18, 3, and 2 eyes, respectively. The mean BCVA improved from 0.67 ± 0.23 logMAR at baseline to 0.52 ± 0.31 logMAR at the end of 12-month follow-up (p = 0.044). Thirty-five percent of patients achieved ≥3 Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study lines improvement at 12 months. Mean CFT at baseline (381 ± 111 µm) decreased to 304 ± 82 µm at 12 months (p = 0.008). Patients received a mean of 4.3 ± 1.3 (range 3-7) injections. No systemic or ocular side effects occurred; no patient experienced further ATEs.
Intravitreal pegaptanib can be considered a viable treatment option for patients with AMD-related CNV who are at high risk of ATEs.
Reticular macular disease (RMD) is the highest risk form of early age-related macular degeneration and also specifically confers decreased longevity. However, because RMD requires advanced retinal imaging for adequate detection of its characteristic subretinal drusenoid deposits (SDD), it has not yet been completely studied with respect to coronary artery disease (CAD), the leading cause of death in the developed world. Because CAD appears in middle age, our purpose was to screen patients aged 45-80 years, documented either with or without CAD, to determine if CAD is associated with RMD.
A prospective cohort study of patients with documented CAD status and no known retinal disease in a clinical practice setting at one institution. Subjects and Controls: A number of 76 eyes from 38 consecutive patients (23 with documented CAD, 15 controls documented without CAD; 47.4% female; mean age 66.7 years).
Patients were imaged with near-infrared reflectance/spectral domain optical coherence tomography and assessed in masked fashion by two graders for the presence of SDD lesions of RMD and soft drusen.
Presence or absence of RMD/SDD and soft drusen.
RMD was more frequent in patients with CAD versus those without (Relative Risk [RR] = 2.1, CI = 1.08-3.95, P = 0.03). There was no association of CAD with soft drusen.
A specific relationship between CAD and RMD suggests common systemic causes for both and warrants further study.
To compare the 1-year outcomes of treat-and-extend (TAE) and every-other-month (2M) regimens with intravitreal aflibercept in Japanese wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD) patients.
Prospective, multicenter, randomized clinical trial. The primary outcome measure was the proportion of eyes in which the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was maintained at week 52 [with a loss of <0.3 logarithm of minimum angular of resolution (logMAR) units]. The secondary outcome measures were the mean change from baseline in the central retinal thickness (CRT) and the number of injections.
Forty-one patients were enrolled. The mean changes in the BCVA from baseline in the TAE and 2M were -0.32 ± 0.27 and -0.26 ± 0.30 logMAR units (p = 0.46). The TAE group was noninferior to the 2M group in BCVA maintenance. The mean CRT changes from baseline in the TAE and 2M were -161 ± 133 and -157 ± 90 μm (p = 0.73). The mean number of injections in the TAE and 2M were 7.5 ± 1.2 (range, 7-12) and 8.0 ± 0.0 (p < 0.0001).
Treat-and-extend (TAE) regimen with aflibercept improved the BCVA and CRT to the same extent as 2M regimen, with a reduced number of injections.
Polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) and neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) are prevalent age-related diseases characterized by exudative changes in the macula. Although they share anatomical and clinical similarities, they are also distinctly characterized by their own features, e.g. vascular abnormalities in PCV and drusen-mediated progression in neovascular AMD. PCV remains etiologically uncharacterized, and ongoing discussion is whether PCV and neovascular AMD share the same etiology or constitute two substantially different diseases. In this study, we investigated T-cell differentiation and aging profile in human patients with PCV, patients with neovascular AMD, and age-matched healthy control individuals. Fresh venous blood was prepared for flow cytometry to investigate CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell differentiation (naïve, central memory, effector memory, effector memory CD45ra<sup>+</sup>), loss of differentiation markers CD27 and CD28, and expression of aging marker CD56. Patients with PCV were similar to the healthy controls in all aspects. In patients with neovascular AMD we found significantly accelerated T-cell differentiation (more CD28<sup>-</sup>CD27<sup>-</sup> cells) and aging (more CD56<sup>+</sup> cells) in the CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell compartment. These findings suggest that PCV and neovascular AMD are etiologically different in terms of T cell immunity, and that neovascular AMD is associated with T-cell immunosenescence.
To study the anterior chamber flare during bevacizumab treatment of exudative age-related macular degeneration.
During a 2-year prospective follow-up, 50 patients recently diagnosed with exudative age-related macular degeneration were treated at once-a-month visits if subretinal or intraretinal fluid or a new hemorrhage was present in the lesion area. Flare was measured weekly during the first month and then monthly in both eyes.
Higher flare was associated with older age (P = 0.007, Linear Mixed Model), higher number of smoking pack-years (P = 0.019), macular cysts (P = 0.041), and pseudophakia (P = 0.003). The levels gradually increased during the follow-up (P < 0.0001) but less in the eyes with classic CNV (P = 0.011). Flare decreased during treatment-free periods lasting for at least two consecutive visits (P = 0.005). A peak in flare was observed 1 week after the first injection (P = 0.034, Wilcoxon signed rank test). In the fellow eyes, higher flare values in the beginning of the follow-up were associated with later conversion into exudative age-related macular degeneration (P = 0.015, Mann-Whitney U test).
Anterior chamber flare correlated poorly with the CNV activity. Higher levels may, however, precede or exist early in the process that leads to the development of exudative age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) compromises quality of life. However, the available therapeutic options are limited. This has led to the identification of modifiable risk factors to prevent the development or alter the natural course and prognosis of AMD. The identification and modification of risk factors has the potential for greater public health impact on reducing morbidity from AMD. Likewise, identifying the imaging clues and genetic clues could serve as a guide to recognizing the propensity for progression to severe and end stages of the disease. Several attempts, both successful and unsuccessful, have been made for interventions that could delay the progression of AMD. Of these, pharmacological interventions have shown promising results. The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 1 and 2 have shown the beneficial role of antioxidants in a selected group of patients.
Subretinal drusenoid deposits (SDD) have been associated with the progression to late age-related macular degeneration (AMD). To determine whether SDD in eyes in normal macular health increases risk for early AMD, this study examined the association between presence of SDD at baseline in a cohort of older adults in normal macular health and incident AMD 3 years later.
Subjects enrolled in the Alabama Study on Early Age-Related Macular Degeneration (ALSTAR) were assessed for the presence of SDD using color fundus photos, infrared reflectance and fundus autofluorescence images, and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography volumes. The study sample included 799 eyes from 455 participants in normal macular health per grading of color fundus photographs using the 9-step Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) classification system. Age-related macular degeneration was defined as eyes having an AREDS grade ≥2 at the 3-year follow-up.
Twenty-five percent of participants had SDD in one or both eyes at baseline. At follow-up visit, 11.9% of eyes in the sample developed AMD. Compared to eyes without SDD, those with SDD were 2.24 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.36-3.70) times more likely to have AMD at follow-up. After adjusting for age, C-reactive protein quartile, and family history of AMD, the association persisted.
Results suggest that SDD in older eyes with normal macular health as defined by the AREDS scale is a risk factor for the development of early AMD. Older adults in seemingly normal macular health yet having SDD may warrant closer clinical monitoring for the possible onset of early AMD.
The choroid is thought to be relevant to the pathogenesis of nonneovascular age-related macular degeneration, but its role has not yet been fully defined. In this study, we evaluate the relationship between the extent of macular drusen and specific choroidal parameters, including thickness and intensity.
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography images were collected from two distinct, independent cohorts with nonneovascular age-related macular degeneration: Amish (53 eyes of 34 subjects) and non-Amish (40 eyes from 26 subjects). All spectral domain optical coherence tomography scans were obtained using the Cirrus HD-OCT with a 512 × 128 macular cube (6 × 6 mm) protocol. The Cirrus advanced retinal pigment epithelium analysis tool was used to automatically compute drusen volume within 3 mm (DV3) and 5 mm (DV5) circles centered on the fovea. The inner and outer borders of the choroid were manually segmented, and the mean choroidal thickness and choroidal intensity (i.e., brightness) were calculated. The choroidal intensity was normalized against the vitreous and nerve fiber layer reflectivity. The correlation between DV and these choroidal parameters was assessed using Pearson and linear regression analysis.
A significant positive correlation was observed between normalized choroidal intensity and DV5 in the Amish (r = 0.42, P = 0.002) and non-Amish (r = 0.33, P = 0.03) cohorts. Also, DV3 showed a significant positive correlation with normalized choroidal intensity in both the groups (Amish: r = 0.30, P = 0.02; non-Amish: r = 0.32, P = 0.04). Choroidal thickness was negatively correlated with normalized choroidal intensity in both Amish (r = -0.71, P = 0.001) and non-Amish (r = -0.43, P = 0.01) groups. Normalized choroidal intensity was the most significant constant predictor of DV in both the Amish and non-Amish groups.
Choroidal intensity, but not choroidal thickness, seems to be associated with drusen volume in Amish and non-Amish populations. These observations suggest that choroidal parameters beyond thickness warrant further study in the setting of age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of blindness in the elderly. Late-stage AMD is characterized by choroidal neovascularization (CNV). miR-93 appears to play a role in regulating vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A), a known factor involved in neovascularization. Understanding its biological significance might enable development of therapeutic interventions for diseases like AMD. We aimed to determine the role of miR-93 in AMD using a laser-induced CNV mouse model. CNV was induced by laser photocoagulation in C57BL/6 mice. The CNV mice were transfected with scrambled miR or miR-93 mimic. The treatment effect was assessed by fundus photography and fluorescein angiography and confirmed by choroidal flatmount. The expression of miR-93 and VEGF-A in ocular tissues was analysed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and Western blot. The overexpression effects of miR-93 were also proved on human microvascular endothelial cells (HMECs). Significantly decreased expression of miR-93 was observed by qPCR analysis in CNV mice compared to untreated mice (p < 0.05). VEGF-A messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression were upregulated with CNV; these changes were ameliorated by restoration of miR-93 (p < 0.05). CNV was reduced after miR-93 transfection. Transfection of miR-93 reduced the proliferation of HMECs (p < 0.01), but no significant changes were observed in 2D capillary-like tube formation (p > 0.05) and migration (p > 0.05) compared with that in the untreated cells. miR-93 has been shown to be a negative modulator of angiogenesis in the eye. All together, these results highlight the therapeutic potential of miR-93 and suggest that it may contribute as a putative therapeutic target for AMD in humans.
To evaluate long-term changes in visual acuity and retinal microstructure in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) who had maintained dry macula after initial treatment.
This retrospective observational study included 55 eyes that were diagnosed with neovascular AMD, were treated with three monthly ranibizumab injections, and maintained dry macula during a two-year follow-up. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at three months and at the final follow-up were compared, and the degree of visual improvement was compared between eyes with and without improvement of the ellipsoid zone. In addition, the incidence of improvement of the ellipsoid zone was compared between eyes with different extents of disruption.
The mean follow-up period was 30.3 ± 4.1 months. BCVA at three months and at the final follow-up was 0.51 ± 0.46 and 0.45 ± 0.49 (P<0.001). Among 35 eyes that exhibited >200 μm of disruption of the ellipsoid zone, 15 (42.9%) showed improvement of the ellipsoid zone, and the improvement in BCVA was greater in these eyes than that in the remaining 20 eyes (P=0.021). A higher incidence of improvement of the ellipsoid zone was noted in eyes with 200 to 800 μm of disruption than in eyes with >800 μm of disruption (P<0.001).
Long-term improvement in visual acuity was noted in eyes that had maintained dry macula after three ranibizumab injections. The status of the ellipsoid zone at three months was closely associated with visual improvement.
Review the current recommendations for the prevention and treatment of age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Articles indexed in PubMed (National Library of Medicine), the Cochrane Reviews and Trials, Dynamed, and Iowa Drug Information Service (IDIS) in the last 10 years using the key words macular degeneration, agerelated macular degeneration (AMD), AMD and treatment, AMD and prevention.
Sixty-nine published papers were reviewed, and criteria supporting the primary objective were used to identify useful resources.
The literature included practice guidelines, original research articles, review articles, product prescribing information, and supplement product information for the prevention and treatment of AMD.
AMD is a leading cause of visual impairment in older adults. At present there is no cure for advanced AMD, but intravitreal vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitors minimize and even reverse vision loss in patients with AMD of the neovascular type. In the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS), participants with intermediate AMD who received a supplement combination of vitamins C and E, beta-carotene, and zinc had a greater delay in progression to advanced AMD than those participants who received a portion of these supplements. In the second AREDS, AREDS2, the addition of lutein + zeaxanthin, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) + eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), or lutein + zeaxanthin and DHA + EPA to the complete AREDS formulation did not further reduce the risk of progression to advanced AMD. Subgroup analyses indicated that additional research with lutein + zeaxanthin supplementation is warranted as it was beneficial in participants with low dietary intake of lutein + zeaxanthin. A formulation without beta-carotene may be best for most patients, especially smokers or former smokers. Health care professionals will want to consider patient-specific information before recommending ocular health supplements.
In numerous epidemiological studies, omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) have been associated with a decreased risk of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Beyond their structural, functional and neuroprotective roles, omega-3 PUFAs may favour the retinal accumulation of lutein and zeaxanthin and thus increase macular pigment optical density (MPOD). We examined the associations of MPOD with plasma omega-3 PUFAs in subjects with family history of AMD.
The Limpia study is a double-blind, placebo-controlled, prospective randomized clinical trial performed in 120 subjects. Subjects with at least one parent treated for neovascular AMD, aged 40-70, with a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) >20/25, free of late AMD and other major eye conditions and with no use of supplement containing lutein or zeaxanthin the preceding year were recruited in Bordeaux and Dijon, France. At baseline, MPOD within 1° of eccentricity was measured by modified Heidelberg retinal analyser (Heidelberg, Germany) and plasma omega-3 PUFAs by gas chromatography. Medical history and lifestyle data were collected from a standardized questionnaire. Associations of MPOD with plasma omega-3 PUFAs were assessed at the baseline examination, using mixed linear models adjusted for age, gender, centre, body mass index, smoking, plasma high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and lutein+zeaxanthin.
After multivariate adjustment, high MPOD was significantly associated with higher level of plasma docosapentaenoic acid (DPA) (β = 0.029, 95% CI: 0.003, 0.055; p = 0.03). Plasma alpha linolenic, eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids were not significantly associated with MPOD.
In the Limpia study, high MPOD within 1° was significantly associated with higher plasma levels of omega-3 DPA.
The aim of study was to evaluate the ability of the enzymatic antioxidant barrier to protect against peroxidation in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration, as compared to healthy subjects.
Hemolysate blood samples collected from 25 patients with wet form age-related macular degeneration and 25 healthy controls were analysed to determine the activity of superoxide dismutase (using Misra and Fridovich method), catalase (using Beers and Sizer method), glutathione peroxidase (using Sedlak and Lindsay method modified by Little and O’Brien), and malondialdehyde concentration (using Placer method).
We observed a statistically significant decrease in the activity of following enzymes in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration, as compared to controls: superoxide dismutase (2086.3 vs. 2348.5 U/gHb/100 ml; p ≤ .05), catalase (6.9 vs. 7.6 BU/gHb, p ≤ .05) and glutathione peroxidase (36.3 vs. 45.8 U/gHb; p ≤ .05). At the same time, an increase in age-related macular degeneration thiobarbituric acid reactive substance concentration was demonstrated in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration, as compared to healthy subjects (.119 vs. .286 µmol/gHb; p ≤ .001).
The obtained results indicate inefficient enzymatic antioxidant system which manifests as intense peroxidation in patients with age-related macular degeneration.
To compare the changes in subfoveal choroidal thickness after intravitreal ranibizumab or aflibercept injections for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
In this retrospective study, 28 eyes with nAMD treated with 3 consecutive monthly injections of ranibizumab (IVR) and 24 eyes with nAMD treated with 3 consecutive monthly injections of aflibercept (IVA) between September 2012 and June 2016 were reviewed. The follow-up time was 6 months. Changes in two groups' best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and subfoveal choroidal thickness by using enhanced depth imaging optical coherence tomography at 1st, 3rd and 6th months were recorded and compared.
Choroidal thickness decreased significantly in eyes treated with IVR (P=0.015, 0.01 and 0.01, respectively) or IVA (P=0.001, 0.001 and ˂0.001, respectively) at 1, 3 and 6 months examination but IVA treated eyes presented a significantly further reduction in choroidal thickness when compared with ranibizumab (P=0.03, 0,04 and 0.03, respectively). There was no significant difference between aflibercept and ranibizumab group when change in BCVA from baseline compared at 1, 3 and 6th months (P=0.54, 0.06 and 0.37, respectively). There was no correlation between change in choroidal thickness and the BCVA outcomes in either group.
Subfoveal choroidal thickness decreased significantly after both of IVR and IVA injections in patients with nAMD. In conclusion, intravitreal injections of ranibizumab or aflibercept affect not only neovascular lesion but also the underlying choroid.
Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) has been implicated as key source of cholesterol-rich deposits at Bruch's membrane (BrM) and in drusen in aging human eye. We have shown that serum-deprivation of confluent RPE cells is associated with upregulation of cholesterol synthesis and accumulation of unesterified cholesterol (UC). Here we investigate the cellular processes involved in this response. We compared the distribution and localization of UC and esterified cholesterol (EC); the age-related macular degeneration (AMD) associated EFEMP1/Fibulin3 (Fib3); and levels of acyl-coenzyme A (CoA): cholesterol acyltransferases (ACAT) ACAT1, ACAT2 and Apolipoprotein B (ApoB) in ARPE-19 cells cultured in serum-supplemented and serum-free media. The results were compared with distributions of these lipids and proteins in human donor eyes with AMD. Serum deprivation of ARPE-19 was associated with increased formation of FM dye-positive membrane vesicles, many of which co-labeled for UC. Additionally, UC colocalized with Fib3 in distinct granules. By day 5, serum-deprived cells grown on transwells secreted Fib3 basally into the matrix. While mRNA and protein levels of ACTA1 were constant over several days of serum-deprivation, ACAT2 levels increased significantly after serum-deprivation, suggesting increased formation of EC. The lower levels of intracellular EC observed under serum-deprivation were associated with increased formation and secretion of ApoB. The responses to serum-deprivation in RPE-derived cells: accumulation and secretion of lipids, lipoproteins, and Fib3 are very similar to patterns seen in human donor eyes with AMD and suggest that this model mimics processes relevant to disease progression.
Age-related macular cegeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of visual dysfunction worldwide, affecting 9-25% of individuals between 65 and 75 years old.
We have reviewed the published articles investigating the role of multifocal electroretinogram (mf-ERG) in the diagnosis and treatment of AMD.
Visual evoked potentials have revealed decreased amplitudes and higher latencies in patients with AMD, while the degeneration of photoreceptors and abnormalities of retinal pigment epithelium can be identified by electro-oculogram recordings. Moreover, ERG can detect the functional abnormalities observed in AMD and evaluate each therapeutic approach. The record of local electrophysiological responses coming from different retinal areas can be accurately performed by mfERG.
The accuracy of mfERG in detecting the degeneration of photoreceptors, as well the disturbances of macular function, could be useful both in the early diagnosis of AMD and the assessment of treatment efficacy.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of supplemental macular carotenoids (including versus not including meso-zeaxanthin) in combination with coantioxidants on visual function in patients with nonadvanced age-related macular degeneration.
In this study, 121 participants were randomly assigned to group 1 (Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 formulation with a low dose [25 mg] of zinc and an addition of 10 mg meso-zeaxanthin; n = 60) or group 2 (Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 formulation with a low dose [25 mg] of zinc; n = 61). Visual function was assessed using best-corrected visual acuity, contrast sensitivity (CS), glare disability, retinal straylight, photostress recovery time, reading performance, and the National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire-25. Macular pigment was measured using customized heterochromatic flicker photometry.
There was a statistically significant improvement in the primary outcome measure (letter CS at 6 cycles per degree [6 cpd]) over time (P = 0.013), and this observed improvement was statistically comparable between interventions (P = 0.881). Statistically significant improvements in several secondary outcome visual function measures (letter CS at 1.2 and 2.4 cpd; mesopic and photopic CS at all spatial frequencies; mesopic glare disability at 1.5, 3, and 6 cpd; photopic glare disability at 1.5, 3, 6, and 12 cpd; photostress recovery time; retinal straylight; mean and maximum reading speed) were also observed over time (P < 0.05, for all), and were statistically comparable between interventions (P > 0.05, for all). Statistically significant increases in macular pigment at all eccentricities were observed over time (P < 0.0005, for all), and the degree of augmentation was statistically comparable between interventions (P > 0.05).
Antioxidant supplementation in patients with nonadvanced age-related macular degeneration results in significant increases in macular pigment and improvements in CS and other measures of visual function. (Clinical trial, http://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN13894787).
To determine safety and visual outcomes in eyes with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) implanted with a novel intraocular lens (IOL) that delivers an optimized retinal image to all macular areas within 10 degrees of retinal eccentricity.
This was a consecutive case series of 244 eyes with dry/stable wet AMD and logMAR visual acuity ≥0.3 implanted with iolAMD Eyemax mono<sup>TM</sup> (London Eye Hospital Pharma), a single-piece, injectable, hydrophobic acrylic IOL sited in the capsular bag. Primary outcome was safety. Secondary outcomes were changes in corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) and corrected near visual acuity (CNVA) (logMAR).
Mean age at surgery was 80 years. Mean duration of follow-up was 3 months (range 1-16 months). No eyes had worsening of CDVA. Frequency of perioperative complications was equivalent to standard IOL implantation. Postoperative refractive outcomes were within ±1 D of the target refraction in 88% of cases. Mean preoperative CDVA improved from 1.06 to 0.71 postoperatively (mean of differences -0.35; 95% confidence interval [CI] -0.3886 to -0.3223; p<0.0001), equating to an approximate Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study gain of 18 letters. Mean preoperative CNVA (N-point; logMAR conversion) improved from 1.36 to 0.88 postoperatively (mean of differences -0.48; 95% CI -0.53 to -0.44; p<0.0001).
This novel IOL appears safe in the short to medium term. Improvements in postoperative CDVA and CNVA exceed those observed with standard implants.
Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD), a progressive retinal disease, is responsible for an impaired central vision in about 180 million people worldwide. Current options for ARMD prevention and treatment are limited due to an incomplete understanding of disease etiopathogenesis. We aimed to test the hypothesis that the single nucleotide polymorphism rs5888 of SCARB1 gene reflecting lipid and antioxidant micronutrient metabolism pathways is associated with ARMD susceptibility and to evaluate if there is any relation between SCARB1 rs5888 and the macular lesion area.
The prospective case-control study included patients with ARMD (n = 215) and the reference group (n = 238) drawn from a random sample of the Lithuanian population (n = 1436). The genotyping test of SCARB1 rs5888 was carried out using the real-time polymerase chain reaction method.
Regression analysis adjusted by gender and age demonstrated that SCARB1 rs5888 TT genotype significantly decreased the odds for ARMD development (OR: 0.61, 95%; CI: 0.380-0.981, p = 0.04). A smoking habit and leading an outdoor life are associated with larger macular lesion areas in ARMD patients (0.54 (0.00-39.06) vs. 3.09 (0.02-19.30) and 0.27 (0.00-34.57) vs. 0.75 (0.00-39.06), respectively). In late stage ARMD subjects with CT genotype, the macular lesion area was larger than in TT carriers (7.64 (0.49-39.06) mm<sup>2</sup> vs. 5.02 (0.03-37.06) mm<sup>2</sup>, p = 0.006).
SCARB1 rs5888 and environmental oxidative stress have a prominent role in ARMD susceptibility, early ARMD progression to advanced stage disease and even in the outcome of the disease-an area of macular lesion.
Neovascular, or wet, age-related macular degeneration causes central vision loss and represents a major health problem in elderly people, and is currently treated with frequent intraocular injections of anti-VEGF protein. Gene therapy might enable long-term anti-VEGF therapy from a single treatment. We tested the safety of rAAV.sFLT-1 in treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration with a single subretinal injection.
In this single-centre, phase 1, randomised controlled trial, we enrolled patients with wet age-related macular degeneration at the Lions Eye Institute and the Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital (Nedlands, WA, Australia). Eligible patients had to be aged 65 years or older, have age-related macular degeneration secondary to active subfoveal choroidal neovascularisation, with best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 3/60-6/24 and 6/60 or better in the other eye. Patients were randomly assigned (3:1) to receive either 1 × 10(10) vector genomes (vg; low-dose rAAV.sFLT-1 group) or 1 × 10(11) vg (high-dose rAAV.sFLT-1 group), or no gene-therapy treatment (control group). Randomisation was done by sequential group assignment. All patients and investigators were unmasked. Staff doing the assessments were masked to the study group at study visits. All patients received ranibizumab at baseline and week 4, and rescue treatment during follow-up based on prespecified criteria including BCVA measured on the Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (EDTRS) scale, optical coherence tomography, and fluorescein angiography. The primary endpoint was ocular and systemic safety. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01494805.
From Dec 16, 2011, to April 5, 2012, we enrolled nine patients of whom eight were randomly assigned to receive either intervention (three patients in the low-dose rAAV.sFLT-1 group and three patients in the high-dose rAAV.sFLT-1 group) or no treatment (two patients in the control group). Subretinal injection of rAAV.sFLT-1 was highly reproducible. No drug-related adverse events were noted; procedure-related adverse events (subconjunctival or subretinal haemorrhage and mild cell debris in the anterior vitreous) were generally mild and self-resolving. There was no evidence of chorioretinal atrophy. Clinical laboratory assessments generally remained unchanged from baseline. Four (67%) of six patients in the treatment group required zero rescue injections, and the other two (33%) required only one rescue injection each.
rAAV.sFLT-1 was safe and well tolerated. These results support ocular gene therapy as a potential long-term treatment option for wet age-related macular degeneration.
National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia, Richard Pearce Bequest, Lions Save Sight Foundation, Brian King Fellowship, and Avalanche Biotechnologies, Inc.
The aim of this communication was to evaluate ranibizumab in the treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration.
Anonymised data on treatment efficacy and safety were consecutively entered into the Czech national database. From 01/09/2008 to 25/10/2011, 671 patients/685 eyes treated with ranibizumab monotherapy were entered in the registry. 454 ranibizumab treated eyes and 444 patients were monitored for 12-months. The dependent variable used to monitor disease progression and treatment results was change in visual acuity in the ETDRS (Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study) chart over time.
After 12 months of treatment, a loss of < 15 letters in the ETDRS chart was found in 81.5% of eyes treated with ranibizumab. A gain of ≥ 15 letters was found in 9.7% of eyes on ranibizumab. The results for our patients treated in clinical practice with ranibizumab were poorer than those in the SUSTAIN (Ranibizumab in Patients With Subfoveal Choroidal Neovascularization Secondary to Age-Related Macular Degeneration) study. A rationale for this was sought in a sub-analysis.
Sub-analysis demonstrated that treatment naive CNV (choroidal neovascularization), occult CNV and lower height of the macular oedema at the outset of the disease may be positive prognostic factors for final visual acuity in anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) treated patients.
To investigate the risk factors associated with prechoroidal cleft occurrence after treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) and to elucidate its clinical significance.
Two hundred thirty-four subjects who were treated for neovascular age-related macular degeneration were assessed to identify prechoroidal cleft on optical coherence tomography. Clinical variables were compared between patients manifesting a cleft (cleft group) and patients who did not (control group).
Prechoroidal cleft was detected in 29 of 234 patients (8.1%). Although the baseline visual acuity was not different between the 2 groups, logMAR visual acuity at final visit was 0.89 ± 0.74 (with approximate Snellen equivalent of 20/160) in the cleft group and 0.65 ± 0.69 (with approximate Snellen equivalent of 20/100) in controls (P < 0.05). Within cleft group, the early-onset (<6 months) subgroup had even worse visual outcomes than the late-onset subgroup (P < 0.05). Multiple logistic regression analyses revealed that the incidence of prechoroidal cleft was positively correlated with having received intravitreal gas injection to displace a submacular hemorrhage and a diagnosis of retinal angiomatous proliferation and typical neovascular age-related macular degeneration (P < 0.05).
Diagnosis of retinal angiomatous proliferation and typical neovascular age-related macular degeneration, and a submacular hemorrhage treated by pneumatic displacement were the independent risk factors for development of prechoroidal cleft. Eyes with a cleft, especially clefts that develop early, generally had worse prognoses than eyes without clefts.
To evaluate the safety and impact on visual acuity, retinal and choroidal morphology of simultaneous cataract surgery and intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor on patients with visually significant cataracts and previously treated exudative age-related macular degeneration.
Prospective study, which included 21 eyes of 20 patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration submitted to simultaneous phacoemulsification and intravitreal ranibizumab or bevacizumab. The patients were followed for 12 months after surgery using a pro re nata strategy. Visual acuity, foveal and choroidal thickness changes were evaluated 1, 6 and 12 months post-operatively.
There was a statistically significant increase in mean visual acuity at one (13.4 letters, p < 0.05), six (11.5 letters, p < 0.05) and twelve months (11.3 letters, p < 0.05) without significant changes in retinal or choroidal morphology. At 12 months, 86% of eyes were able to maintain visual acuity improvement. There were no significant differences between the two anti-vascular endothelial growth factor drugs and no complications developed during follow-up.
Simultaneous phacoemulsification and intravitreal anti- vascular endothelial growth factor is safe and allows improvement in visual acuity in patients with visually significant cataracts and exudative age-related macular degeneration. Visual acuity gains were maintained with a pro re nata strategy showing that in this subset of patients, phacoemulsification may be beneficial.
Cataract surgery and simultaneous anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy improves visual acuity in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration.
To investigate possible associations between VEGFR-2 and IL-8 gene SNPs and 1-year response to intravitreal ranibizumab for exudative age-related macular degeneration.
Sixty-four eyes underwent a loading phase of three monthly intravitreal injections of ranibizumab 0.5 mg/0.05 ml followed by Pro Re Nata retreatment. VEGFR-2 rs2071559 (-604 A/G) and IL-8 rs4073 (-251 A/T) were analyzed.
Ranibizumab was significantly more effective as measured by visual acuity in patients harboring the IL-8 rs4073 TT genotype (p = 0.045), whereas patients carrying the VEGFR-2 rs2071559 CC genotype revealed better functional response as measured by mean retinal sensitivity (p = 0.034).
IL-8 rs4073 and VEGFR-2 rs2071559 genotypes may represent important molecular determinants to modulate final outcomes in neovascular age-related macular degeneration patients.
To identify and describe nursing actions performed by nurses that create a sense of good nursing care in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration.
People who suffer from wet age-related macular degeneration risk central vision loss. Treatment with antivascular endothelial growth factor is the only available option at present that preserves vision and no definitive cure currently exists. Patients feel that they are compelled to accept this treatment because they might otherwise become blind.
An explorative and descriptive design based on the critical incident technique was used.
Interviews with 16 Swedish patients who all had received intravitreal treatment for wet age-related macular degeneration.
Two main areas of good nursing care were identified: 'Being perceived as an individual' and 'Being empowered'. The first area was divided into two categories: being respectful and being engaged. Being respectful was observed when nurses had a benevolent attitude towards their patients and answered questions kindly and politely. Patients saw themselves as individuals when nurses were available for conversation and focused on them. The second area was divided into two categories: encouraging participation and creating confidence. Encouraging participation refers to when nurses provided information continuously. Nurses instilled confidence and trust in their patients by keeping promises and by being honest.
A respectful interaction between patients and caregivers is necessary for patients to obtain beneficial health care.
Patient interviews revealed important information about nursing actions that created a sense of good nursing care in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration. Nurses acknowledged people as individuals and created trust by building partnerships and sharing decision-making. To address each patient's concerns, nurses need to prioritise each patient's narrative and participation by documenting agreements in their medical record.
Optical coherence tomography angiography is one of the biggest advances in ophthalmic imaging. It enables a depth-resolved assessment of the retinal and choroidal blood flow, far exceeding the levels of detail commonly obtained with dye angiographies. One of the first applications of optical coherence tomography angiography was in detecting the presence of choroidal neovascularization in age-related macular degeneration and establishing its position in relation to the retinal pigmented epithelium and Bruch's membrane, and thereby classifying the CNV as type 1, type 2, type 3, or mixed lesions. Optical coherence tomography angiograms, due to the longer wavelength used by optical coherence tomography, showed a more distinct choroidal neovascularization vascular pattern than fluorescein angiography, since there is less suffering from light scattering or is less obscured by overlying subretinal hemorrhages or exudation. Qualitative and quantitative assessments of optical coherence tomography angiography findings in exudative and nonexudative age-related macular degeneration have been largely investigated within the past 3 years both in clinical and experimental settings. This review constitutes an up-to-date of all the potential applications of optical coherence tomography angiography in age-related macular degeneration in order to better understand how to translate its theoretical usefulness into the current clinical practice.
To determine the repeatability of measuring the thickness of the central macula, retinal nerve fiber layer, and ganglion cell-inner plexiform layer (GC-IPL) using spectral domain optical coherence tomography (Cirrus HD-OCT) in eyes with age-related macular degeneration.
One hundred and thirty-four eyes were included. The measurement repeatability was assessed by an experienced examiner who performed two consecutive measurements using a 512 × 128 macular cube scan and a 200 × 200 optic disk cube scan. To assess changes in macular morphology in patients with age-related macular degeneration, the patients were divided into the following three groups according to the central macular thickness (CMT): A group, CMT < 200 μm; B group, 200 μm ≤ CMT < 300 μm; and C group, CMT > 300 μm.
Measurement repeatability was assessed using test-retest variability, a coefficient of variation, and an intraclass correlation coefficient. The mean measurement repeatability for the central macular, retinal nerve fiber layer, and GC-IPL thickness was high in the B group. The mean measurement repeatability for both the central macula and retinal nerve fiber layer thickness was high in the A and C groups, but was lower for the GC-IPL thickness. The measurement repeatability for GC-IPL thickness was high in the B group, but low in the A group and in the C group.
The automated measurement repeatability for GC-IPL thickness was significantly lower in patients with age-related macular degeneration with out of normal CMT range. The effect of changes in macular morphology should be considered when analyzing GC-IPL thicknesses in a variety of ocular diseases.
The study highlights the role of Optical Coherence Angiography in the management of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration who have developed subretinal fibrosis.
Development of subretinal fibrosis in the context of neovascular age-related macular degeneration is known to adversely affect visual function. The aim of this study is to assess structure and flow features obtained through swept-source optical coherence tomography angiography in patients with subretinal fibrosis and associate these with visual acuity.
Institutional retrospective cohort study PARTICIPANTS: 39 eyes of 39 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration with subretinal fibrosis imaged with optical coherence tomography angiography were included in this study METHODS: Patients underwent Swept-Source Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography. Thickness of subretinal hyper-reflective material and presence and configuration of a choroidal neovascular membrane were recorded in each case.
A univariate multiple regression was performed seeking associations between visual acuity and structural and flow optical coherence tomography angiography features.
Average visual acuity on the date of optical coherence tomography angiography was 53 + 22 ETDRS letters. Average thickness of center-involving subretinal hyper-reflective material was 157 +/- 73 microns. A choroidal neovascular membrane was detectable in 26 cases and not detectable in 13. Visual acuity was independently influenced by thickness of subretinal hyper-reflective material (p=0.034) and presence of a detectable choroidal neovascular membrane (p=0.02) on optical coherence tomography angiography.
Poorer visual acuity in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration and subretinal fibrosis is associated with presence of a detectable neovascular membrane on optical coherence tomography angiography. The role of optical coherence tomography angiography to guide nuanced management decisions in this patient population may be significant. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Evolving anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) treatments for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) include long acting agents, combination strategies involving new pathways, topical agents, sustained-release, and genetic therapy strategies. Areas covered: Brolucizumab and abicipar pegol have smaller molecular size, facilitating higher concentrations and potentially longer duration than current anti-VEGF agents. Agents being combined with anti-VEGFs include OPT-302 (to inhibit VEGF-C and VEGF-D); pegpleranib and rinucumab (to inhibit platelet derived growth factor, PDGF - but both failed to show consistently improved visual outcomes compared to anti-VEGF monotherapy); and RG7716, ARP-1536 and nesvacumab (to activate the Tie-2 tyrosine kinase receptor, which reduces permeability). X-82 is an oral anti-VEGF and anti-PDGF being tested in phase 2 studies. Topical anti-VEGF ± anti-PDGF drugs under study include pazopanib, PAN-90806, squalamine lactate, regorafinib, and LHA510. Sustained-release anti-VEGF delivery treatments, such as the ranibizumab Port Delivery System, GB-102, NT-503, hydrogel depot, Durasert, and ENV1305 aim to reduce the burden of frequent injections. Gene therapies with new viral vectors hold the potential to induce sustained expression of anti-angiogenic proteins via the retina's cellular apparatus, and include AVA-101/201, ADVM-202/302, AAV2-sFLT01, RGX314, and Retinostat. Expert opinion: There are many emerging anti-VEGF treatments that aim to improve visual outcomes and reduce the treatment burden of nAMD.
Age-related macular degeneration is the major cause of blindness in the elderly worldwide and the risk is influenced by both environmental and genetic risk factors. One important disease-associated region in humans is located on 10q26 and includes the two candidate genes ARMS2 and HTRA1. However, determination of the causative gene has not yet been possible and examining the situation in the rhesus monkey may help understand the situation in humans. In a recent paper, we characterized the rhesus monkey 10q26-orthologue region on chromosome 9 in detail and identified the drusen-associated HTRA1 promoter SNP rs196357513 as a putative risk factor. In this study, we predicted 9 binding sites for the vitamin D-dependent transcription factor vitamin D receptor in the rhesus HTRA1 promoter, one of which is destroyed by the rs196357513-risk allele. As patients with vitamin D deficit are at increased risk for age-related macular degeneration, a luciferase assay in transiently transfected ARPE19-cells was performed to evaluate the influence of the SNP rs196357513 and of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D on the rhesus monkey HTRA1 promoter activity. This revealed that the luciferase activity of the promoter construct containing the rs196357513 wild type allele was significantly reduced after vitamin D stimulation. An in silico analysis and literature search imply that this regulation could also play a role in human HTRA1 expression. Moreover, HTRA1 promoter activity of the construct containing the rs196357513 risk allele appeared diminished in comparison to the construct with the wild type allele, albeit this difference was not significant. The lower promoter activity due to the rhesus monkey rs196357513 risk allele apparently contradicts the common hypothesis for the human HTRA1 promoter risk allele of SNP rs11200638, for which a higher promoter activity has been observed. Our data point to a yet unexpected effect of decreased HTRA1 expression on drusen pathogenesis. Thus not only a higher HTRA1 expression, but an imbalance of HTRA1 might be disease-relevant. Both findings require closer analysis, but if relevance for humans proves true, it would impact current age-related macular degeneration research and treatment. 
To evaluate the efficacy of photobiomodulation (PBM) treatment for patients with dry age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Assessments on 42 eyes with dry AMD (age related eye disease study (AREDS) 2-4) were conducted. Multiwavelength light emitting diode (LED) light comprising of yellow (590 nm), red (670 nm) and near-infrared (790 nm) bandwidths was applied to subjects' eyes for a treatment course of 3 weeks. Outcome measures were changes in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), contrast sensitivity (CS), drusen volume and central drusen thickness.
Significant improvement in mean BCVA of 5.90 letters (p < 0.001) was seen on completion of the 3-week treatment and 5.14 letters (p < 0.001) after 3 months. Contrast sensitivity improved significantly (log unit improvement of 0.11 (p = 0.02) at 3 weeks and 3 months (log unit improvement of 0.16 (p = 0.02) at three cycles per degree. Drusen volume decreased by 0.024 mm<sup>3</sup> (p < 0.001) and central drusen thickness was significantly reduced by a mean of 3.78 μm (p < 0.001), while overall central retinal thickness and retinal volume remained stable.
This is the first study demonstrating improvements in functional and anatomical outcomes in dry AMD subjects with PBM therapy. These findings corroborate an earlier pilot study that looked at functional outcome measures. The addition of anatomical evidence contributes to the basis for further development of a non-invasive PBM treatment for dry AMD.
This case-control study aimed to explore the association between prior coronary heart disease (CHD) and neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) using a population-based data set in Taiwan.
We analysed data sourced from the Taiwan Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2005. The study consisted of 1970 patients with neovascular AMD as cases and 5910 age- and sex-matched controls. We performed a conditional logistic regression to examine the odds ratio (OR) and its corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) for previously diagnosed CHD between cases and controls.
Of the 7880 sampled patients, 24.5% had a prior history of CHD; CHD was found in 25.7% of cases and in 22.7% of controls (p = 0.008). The conditional logistic regression analysis indicated that the OR for prior CHD for cases was 1.17 [95% confidence interval (CI): 1.04-1.32] compared to the controls. However, after adjusting for patient's monthly income, geographic location, urbanization level, age, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes and hypertension, we failed to observe an association between prior CHD and AMD (OR = 1.03, 95% CI = 0.91-1.17). Additionally, the medical comorbidities of hyperlipidaemia (adjusted OR = 1.29, 95% CI = 1.15-1.45), hypertension (adjusted OR = 1.20, 95% CI = 1.05-1.37) and diabetes (adjusted OR = 1.47, 95% CI = 1.32-1.65) were significantly associated with AMD.
This study presented no significant difference in the odds of prior CHD between patients with AMD and those without AMD after adjusting for comorbidities and sociodemographic characteristics in a Chinese population.
To compare the differences in the clinical therapeutic effects on early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in the treatment between <i>emayaoling</i> acupuncture technique and regular acupuncture.
A total of 110 patients of AMD were randomized into an observation group (55 cases, 73 eyes) and a control group (55 cases, 76 eyes). In the observation group, acupuncture was applied at Cuanzhu (BL 2) and Yiming (EX-HN 14). The needles were retained for 30 min. Additionally, Ganshu (BL 18), Pishu (BL 20) and Shenshu (BL 23) were stimulated with quick needling technique. <i>Emayaoling</i> needling technique was applied. The needle was rotated with the thumb and index finger of the puncture hand, forward and backward. The strong and large amplitude were given when the thumb moved forward, and while, the week and small amplitude required when moving backward. The gentle movement was required in the entire procedure. In the control group, the point selection was same as the observation group. The points were stimulated with regular technique. The needle retaining time was same as the observation group. The treatment was given once every two days in the two groups and for 3 months continuously. The visit was followed up for 3 months. Before and after treatment, as well as at follow-up, the eyesight, the effect on macular area and the macular retinal structure [the macular nerve fiber layer (MNFL), retinal neurepithelium layer (RNL), pigment epithelium and choroid capillary composite lay (PECCL)] were evaluated separately.
1. After treatment and at follow-up, the eyesight was improved as compared with that before treatment in the two groups, indicating the significant difference (both <i>P</i><0.05). The differences in comparison before and after treatment, and in comparison of the follow-up with that before treatment, were improved in a larger amplitude in the observation group as compared with the control group, indicating the significant difference (both <i>P</i><0.05). 2. Regarding the therapeutic effects on macular area, after treatment and at follow-up, the total effective rates were 83.6% (61/73) and 86.3% (63/73) in the observation group and were 63.2% (48/76) and 67.1% (51/76) in the control group separately. The results in the observation group were higher than those in the control group, indicating the significant difference between the two groups (both <i>P</i><0.05). 3. Regarding the macular retinal structure, after treatment and at follow-up, the levels of MNFL, RNL and PECCL were all reduced as compared with those before treatment, indicating the significant difference (all <i>P</i><0.05). After treatment and at follow-up, the levels of MNFL, RNL and PECCL in the observation group were all lower than those in the control group, indicating the significant difference (all <i>P</i><0.05).
The <i>emayaoling</i> acupuncture technique achieves better clinical therapeutic effects on treatment of early AMD as compared with the regular acupuncture.
To describe the changes of fundus autofluorescence (FAF) in patients with age-related macular degeneration before and after intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor according to the type of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) and to evaluate the correlation of FAF with spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) parameters and vision.
This was a retrospective study. Twenty-one treatment-naïve patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration were included. Study eyes were divided into two groups according to the type of CNV. Fourteen eyes were type 1 CNV and seven eyes were type 2 CNV. All eyes underwent a complete ophthalmologic examination, including an assessment of best-corrected visual acuity, SD-OCT, fluorescein angiography, and FAF imaging, before and 3 months after intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injection. Gray scales of FAF image for CNV areas, delineated as in fluorescein angiography, were analyzed using the ImageJ program, which were adjusted by comparison with normal background areas. Correlation of changes in FAF with changes in SD-OCT parameters, including CNV thickness, photoreceptor inner and outer segment junction disruption length, external limiting membrane disruption length, central macular thickness, subretinal fluid, and intraretinal fluid were analyzed.
Eyes with both type 1 and type 2 CNV showed reduced FAF before treatment. The mean gray scales (%) of type 1 and type 2 CNV were 52.20% and 42.55%, respectively. The background values were 106.72 and 96.86. After treatment, the mean gray scales (%) of type 1 CNV and type 2 CNV were changed to 57.61% (p = 0.005) and 57.93% (p = 0.008), respectively. After treatment, CNV thickness, central macular thickness, and inner and outer segment junction disruption length were decreased while FAF increased.
FAF was noted to be reduced in eyes with newly diagnosed wet age-related macular degeneration, but increased after anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy regardless of CNV lesion type.
To study the effects of converting to aflibercept in accordance with a treat and extend (T&E) strategy in eyes with treatment resistant exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Two-year prospective study of eyes with exudative AMD and persistent macular fluid despite monthly treatment with ranibizumab or bevacizumab. Eyes were converted to 2.0 mg aflibercept in accordance with a T&E protocol.
Fifty eyes from 47 patients were included. At baseline, the mean central retinal thickness (CRT) was 273 μm and mean best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) 0.25 logarithm of the minimal angle of resolution (logMAR). The mean number of aflibercept injections the first year was 9.2. After 1 year, there was a reduction in mean CRT to 228 μm (p < 0.001); 22 eyes (44%) had a dry macula; and the mean BCVA was 0.24 logMAR (p = 0.531). The mean number of aflibercept injections the second year was 8.0 (p = 0.013 compared to first year). After 2 years, 24 eyes (48%) received treatment more frequently than every eighth week. The mean CRT was 225 μm (p < 0.001 compared to baseline); 31 eyes (62%) had a dry macula; and mean BCVA was 0.32 logMAR (p = 0.005 compared to baseline). Five eyes did not complete 2 years of aflibercept treatment after failing to improve.
A majority of eyes showed improved anatomic outcomes. There was a small decrease in mean BCVA after the second year of treatment. About half of the eyes required treatment more frequently than the recommended aflibercept label of an 8-week interval.
Choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in age-related macular degeneration usually causes blindness. We established a novel targeted inhibitor for CNV in age-related macular degeneration. The inhibitor CR2-sFlt 1 comprises a CR2-targeting fragment and an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) domain (sFlt 1). The targeting of CR2-sFlt 1 was studied using the transwell assay in vitro and frozen sections in vivo using green fluorescent labeling. Transwell assay results showed that CR2-sFlt 1 migrated to the interface of complement activation products and was present in the retinal tissue of the CR2-sFlt 1-treated CNV mice. Treatment effects were assessed by investigating the VEGF concentration in retinal pigmented epithelial cell medium and the thickness of the CNV complex in the mice treated with CR2-sFlt 1. CR2-sFlt 1 significantly reduced the VEGF secretion from retinal pigmented epithelial cells in vitro and retarded CNV progress in a mouse model. Expression analysis of VEGF and VEGFRs after CR2-sFlt 1 intervention indicated the existence of feedback mechanisms in exogenous CR2-sFlt 1, endogenous VEGF, and VEGFR interaction. In summary, we demonstrated for the first time that using CR2-sFlt 1 could inhibit CNV with clear targeting and high selectivity.
There is a well-established research base surrounding face recognition in patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD). However, much of this existing research does not differentiate between results obtained for 'wet' AMD and 'dry' AMD. Here, we test the hypothesis that face recognition performance is worse in patients with dry AMD compared with visually healthy peers.
Patients (>60 years of age, logMAR binocular visual acuity 0.7 or better) with dry AMD of varying severity and visually healthy age-related peers (controls) completed a modified version of the Cambridge Face Memory Test (CFMT). Percentage of correctly identified faces was used as an outcome measure for performance for each participant. A 90% normative reference limit was generated from the distribution of CFMT scores recorded in the visually healthy controls. Scores for AMD participants were then specifically compared to this limit, and comparisons between average scores in the AMD severity groups were investigated.
Thirty patients (median [interquartile range] age of 76 [70, 79] years) and 34 controls (median age of 70 [64, 75] years) were examined. Four, seventeen and nine patients were classified as having early, intermediate and late AMD (geographic atrophy) respectively. Five (17%) patients recorded a face recognition performance worse than the 90% limit (Fisher's exact test, p = 0.46) set by controls; four of these had geographic atrophy. Patients with geographic atrophy identified fewer faces on average (±SD) (61% ± 22%) than those with early and intermediate AMD (75 ± 11%) and controls (74% ± 11%).
People with dry AMD may not suffer from problems with face recognition until the disease is in its later stages; those with late AMD (geographic atrophy) are likely to have difficulty recognising faces. The results from this study should influence the management and expectations of patients with dry AMD in both community practice and hospital clinics.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a complex and progressive degenerative eye disease resulting in severe loss of central vision. Recent evidence indicates that immune system dysregulation could contribute to the development of AMD. We hypothesize that defective lysosome-mediated clearance causes accumulation of waste products in the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE), activating the immune system and leading to retinal tissue injury and AMD. We have generated unique genetically engineered mice in which lysosome-mediated clearance (both by phagocytosis and autophagy) in RPE cells is compromised, causing the development of features of early AMD. Our recent data indicate a link between lipocalin-2 (LCN-2) and the inflammatory responses induced in this mouse model. We show that nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and STAT-1 may function as a complex in our animal model system, together controlling the upregulation of LCN-2 expression in the retina and stimulating an inflammatory response. This study revealed increased infiltration of LCN-2-positive neutrophils in the choroid and retina of early AMD patients as compared with age-matched controls. Our results demonstrate that, both in our animal model and in human AMD, the AKT2-NF-κB-LCN-2 signalling axis is involved in activating the inflammatory response, making this pathway a potential target for AMD treatment. Copyright © 2016 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Optical coherence tomography angiography is a new imaging modality that provides noninvasive characterization and quantification of the microvasculature in different retinal conditions. The purpose of this study was to give an updated review of the features of dry age-related macular degeneration investigated by means of new-generation optical coherence tomography angiography. We searched PubMed and Medline using the terms "optical coherence tomography angiography" associated with "age-related macular degeneration," "drusen," "reticular pseudodrusen," and "geographic atrophy" and reviewed publications up to January 2017.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a disease with rising prevalence. This study evaluates patients' knowledge and the need for more patient information.
271 patients with AMD were asked to complete a questionnaire concerning their knowledge about AMD. 150 patients were interviewed by a physician and 121 patients completed the questionnaire on their own.
79.4 % of patients had previous knowledge about AMD. Most patients, 97.3 %, got their information from physicians. 58 % of patients find their knowledge concerning AMD adequate. Only 23.9 % knew about aid organizations for patients with visual impairments.
Though the majority of patients had good knowledge concerning AMD, there was a large percentage of patients who seemed to lack information. Physicians should actively ask their patients if they have any questions related to their disease. Medial focus on AMD and information about aid organizations could help patients to cope with their disease.
A large number of patients seemed to need additional information. We suggest that ophthalmologists provide general information concerning AMD to their patients every 3 to 5 years. Information about aid organizations specializing in visual impairment could also be provided. Well-informed patients would be better able to follow their physician's instructions and would have a better understanding of their disease, particularly for the sake of therapy.
The clinical development of anti-VEGF therapies for the treatment of exudative age-related macular degeneration (wet AMD) has revolutionized ophthalmology. Indeed, it has provided clinicians and patients with treatments that lessen visual loss from in a disease that once was uniformly blinding. Although blindness is yet to be eradicated from AMD, repeated intraocular anti-VEGF injections are required to preserve a patient's vision. Therefore, further advances in this field are necessary.
This review provides an overview of the agents that are in mid-stage phase trials for both exudative (wet AMD) and nonexudative macular degeneration (dry AMD). For wet AMD, new agents intend to enhance efficacy, develop alternative delivery such as eye drops, investigate alternate targets and construct sustained release strategies. For advanced dry AMD, the goal is to develop a strategy to slow or stop progressive loss of retinal tissue seen in geographic atrophy, the hallmark of advanced dry AMD.
It is important to develop better more sensitive biomarkers, validating different approvable clinical trial endpoints and stratifying patients on their genetic polymorphisms. These developments should help to progress the already rapidly developing field of macular degeneration therapy.
To evaluate the association between pseudodrusen and incidence of late age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in fellow eyes of patients with unilateral neovascular AMD (nAMD).
Cohort study within the Comparison of AMD Treatments Trials (CATT).
Patients with neither nAMD nor geographic atrophy (GA) in the fellow eye at baseline.
Presence and type (dot, reticular, or confluent) of baseline pseudodrusen were assessed using digital color fundus photography (CFP) viewed under full color, green channel, and blue channel; red-free images; and fluorescein angiography (FA). Incidence of nAMD was based on monthly clinical examination and reading center evaluation of images at years 1 and 2. Incidence of GA was based on reading center evaluation of CFP and FA images at years 1 and 2. Associations of baseline pseudodrusen with incident nAMD and GA were summarized with adjusted risk ratios (aRRs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) from multivariate Cox models, with adjustment of covariates identified through backward stepwise selection.
Incident nAMD and GA.
Among 620 fellow eyes, 176 (28.4%) had baseline pseudodrusen (55% dot, 82% reticular, 35% confluent). Within 2 years, nAMD occurred in 54 eyes (30.7%) with pseudodrusen and in 72 eyes (16.2%) without pseudodrusen (aRR, 2.05; 95% CI, 1.43-2.93); GA occurred in 27 eyes (15.3%) with pseudodrusen and in 37 eyes (8.3%) without pseudodrusen (aRR, 1.89; 95% CI, 1.13-3.17); late AMD occurred in 73 eyes (41.5%) with pseudodrusen and in 101 eyes (22.8%) without pseudodrusen (aRR, 2.07; 95% CI, 1.51-2.83). Dot pseudodrusen were associated independently with nAMD (aRR, 2.53; 95% CI, 1.60-4.00), whereas confluent pseudodrusen were associated independently with GA (aRR, 4.35; 95% CI, 1.69-11.2). Eyes with pseudodrusen had increased incidence of late AMD regardless of whether the Age-Related Eye Diseases Study (AREDS) severity score was 2 (28.7% vs. 10.3%), 3 (34.9% vs. 13.7%), or 4 (50.5% vs. 32.0%).
In fellow eyes of CATT participants, pseudodrusen were associated independently with a higher incidence of both nAMD and GA. Dot pseudodrusen were associated with nAMD, whereas confluent pseudodrusen were associated with GA. Pseudodrusen should be considered along with the AREDS severity score for predicting late AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of blindness among senior citizens of developed countries, with currently unknown etiology. Despite the close associations between AMD development and inhibitory complement factor H mutations, the first step of complement activation, which is the antibody response in AMD patients, has not been studied. Here, we obtained blood and tear samples from AMD patients and Non-AMD controls. We found that compared to Non-AMD controls, AMD subjects had increased IgA titers in serum and tear, and had elevated levels of circulating antibody-secreting plasmablasts. The increase in antibody titer was limited to the IgA isotype, since no significant differences were observed in IgM and IgG isotypes between AMD patients and Non-AMD controls. Interestingly, this increased antibody response in AMD patients was correlated with disease severity, as late AMD patients had increased IgA titers in serum and tear, as well as elevated plasmablast frequency after staphylococcal enterotoxin B stimulation, compared to early AMD patients. Together, our results implicated a role of overreactive IgA responses in AMD pathogenesis.
To test the hypothesis that the thickness of outer retinal layers will change with increasing age in normal eyes and in the normal fellow eyes of patients with unilateral age-related macular degeneration.
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography images of 127 normal eyes of 127 subjects and 58 normal fellow eyes of 58 patients with unilateral age-related macular degeneration were studied. The thickness between the retinal pigment epithelium line and the cone outer segment tips line, between the cone outer segment tips line and the photoreceptor inner segment/outer segment line, and between the inner segment/outer segment line and the external limiting membrane line were measured at the fovea in both groups.
The thickness between retinal pigment epithelium line and the cone outer segment tips line, and between inner segment/outer segment line and the external limiting membrane line were significantly and negatively associated with age in the normal group. Cone outer segment tips line and the photoreceptor inner segment/outer segment thickness was not significantly associated with age. Retinal pigment epithelium line and the cone outer segment tips line was thinner in the fellow eyes of patients with unilateral age-related macular degeneration than in the age-matched normal eyes. Cone outer segment tips line and the photoreceptor inner segment/outer segment and inner segment/outer segment line and the external limiting membrane line thicknesses in the fellow eyes were not significantly different from that of normal eyes.
The tissue between the retinal pigment epithelium line and the cone outer segment tips line may become atrophic in older eyes and in the normal fellow eyes of patients with unilateral age-related macular degeneration.
Telomeres located at the ends of chromosomes are involved in genomic stability and play a key role in various cancers and age-related diseases. Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a late-onset, age-associated progressive neurodegenerative disease, which includes the geographic atrophy (GA) subtype and the choroidal neovascularization (CNV) subtype. To better understand how leukocyte telomere length (LTL) is related to AMD, we conducted an association study in 197 AMD patients and 259 healthy controls using the established quantitative PCR technique. Logistic regression was performed to evaluate the association of LTL and AMD with the age-adjusted ratio of the telomere length to the copy number of a single-copy gene (T/S). Notably, we found a significant association between AMD and LTL (OR=2.24; 95% CI=1.68-3.07; P=0.0001) after adjusting for age and sex. Furthermore, the results showed a strongly significant association between the GA subtype and the LTL (OR=4.81; 95% CI=3.15-7.82; P=0.0001) after adjusting for age and sex. Our findings provide evidence of the role that LTL plays in the pathological mechanisms of AMD, mainly in the GA subgroup but not the CNV subgroup. 
To investigate associations of very early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) with daily intake of vitamin A, beta-carotene, vitamin E, vitamin C, zinc and copper and interactions with AMD-associated polymorphisms in complement factor H (CFHY402H) and ARMS2/LOC387715.
Cross-sectional study of 848 subjects aged 30-60 years from the Inter99 Eye Study. Daily intake of vitamins and minerals was estimated from a 198-item food frequency questionnaire. Digital fundus photographs were recorded in red-free illumination and graded for macular drusen >63 μm and numerous (>20) small hard macular drusen as a mean of both eyes.
Higher intake of vitamin A increased the risk of having macular drusen >63 μm with odds ratio = 1.82 (CI<sub>95</sub> 1.02-3.24, p = 0.042) comparing participants in the highest quartile of vitamin A intake with participants in the lowest quartile, adjusted for recruitment group, age and sex. There was a significant interaction with CFHY402H (p = 0.038). Among 504 participants with CFHY402H, the relative risk of having macular drusen >63 μm was increased in participants in the highest quartile of vitamin A intake (odds ratio = 2.58; CI<sub>95</sub> 1.16-5.73, p = 0.020) and in the second highest quartile (odds ratio = 3.27; CI<sub>95</sub> 1.50-7.13, p = 0.0029) compared with the lowest quartile. Further adjusting for total fat intake, energy intake, plasma cholesterol, body mass index (BMI), smoking, alcohol intake, education and physical activity strengthened the association.
In this cross-sectional study, a higher intake of vitamin A increased the risk of macular drusen >63 μm in subjects with CFHY402H. The study supports that vitamin A may be a risk factor for early AMD.
In this study (AMD2000), we aimed to determine the visual prognosis of Japanese patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
This was a multicenter prospective observational cohort study. In total, 460 patients with AMD were recruited from April 2006 to March 2009 from 18 clinical trial sites in Japan. They were followed up for 5 years, as they continued to receive medical treatment.
Of the 409 study eyes followed up for at least 1 year, 243 eyes (59.4%) were treated with photodynamic therapy (PDT) using verteporfin, and 58 eyes (14.2%) were treated with intravitreal injections of antivascular endothelial growth factor agents as the initial treatment. The mean best-corrected visual acuities (BCVA) for typical AMD (tAMD; 0.688 ± 0.498) and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV; 0.451 ± 0.395) were significantly less at 2 years (tAMD, 0.779 ± 0.632, P < 0.05; PCV, 0.534 ± 0.618, P < 0.05) and at 5 years (AMD, 0.873 ± 0.718, P < 0.05; PCV, 0.635 ± 0.668, P < 0.05) than at baseline. In eyes with tAMD, absence of blocked fluorescence was associated with 5-year maintenance of the baseline BCVA. Regarding PCV, the presence of polypoidal lesions and cystoid macular edema as well as the lesion size was associated with 5-year maintenance of the baseline BCVA. In some patients, the diagnosis changed: of the 192 eyes initially diagnosed with typical AMD, 19 were newly diagnosed with PCV during follow-up.
Maintaining the baseline BCVA over the long term is difficult in Japanese eyes with wet AMD.
To evaluate the relationship between retinal vascular caliber (RVC), iris color, and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in elderly Irish nuns.
Data from 1233 participants in the cross-sectional observational Irish Nun Eye Study were assessed from digital photographs with a standardized protocol using computer-assisted software. Macular images were graded according to the modified Wisconsin Age-related Maculopathy Grading System. Regression models were used to assess associations, adjusting for age, mean arterial blood pressure, body mass index, refraction, and fellow RVC.
In total, 1122 (91%) participants had gradable retinal images of sufficient quality for vessel assessment (mean age: 76.3 years [range, 56-100 years]). In an unadjusted analysis, we found some support for a previous finding that individuals with blue iris color had narrower retinal venules compared to those with brown iris color (P < 0.05), but this was no longer significant after adjustment. Age-related macular degeneration status was categorized as no AMD, any AMD, and late AMD only. Individuals with any AMD (early or late AMD) had significantly narrower arterioles and venules compared to those with no AMD in an unadjusted analysis, but this was no longer significant after adjustment. A nonsignificant reduced risk of any AMD or late AMD only was observed in association with brown compared to blue iris color, in both unadjusted and adjusted analyses.
Retinal vascular caliber was not significantly associated with iris color or early/late AMD after adjustment for confounders. A lower but nonsignificant AMD risk was observed in those with brown compared to blue iris color.
To develop a generative mathematical model of wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and model the impact of injections of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor to virtual patients with the condition.
We isolated key pathophysiological components of macular degeneration in terms of macular edema development and response to anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents. We developed mathematical models for each of these components using constants determined from published biological experimentation. Consequently, we combined the mathematical models of the separate components to arrive at an end-to-end model of the evolution of macular edema size and its response to treatment.
We present a series of simulations based upon our idealised model. Initially, we demonstrate the theoretical change in macular edema height in wet macular degeneration over time without and with anti-VEGF interventions. In our final simulation, we demonstrate the powerful possibilities of virtual clinical trials by simulating a virtual model of a landmark study using our existing mathematical AMD model.
Using our mathematical modelling based upon known pathological and pharmacological processes we have been able to model the effect of intravitreal injection of an anti-VEGF agent on macular edema from age related macular degeneration. We were subsequently able to mathematically simulate a major clinical trial with results that mirror many key features of the clinical established study. We anticipate that the generative model presented here can evolve to be a useful supportive tool in the challenge to deliver optimal therapy for patients with wet macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is one of the leading causes of blindness in the elderly population. Although there are prevalence studies for AMD in Europe, data are scarce for the Slovakian population.
This was a prospective, multicenter, non-interventional, mobile clinic-based cross-sectional study that assessed age-specific prevalence of AMD in the Slovakian population and risk factors associated with AMD. The type of AMD was graded based on the international age-related maculopathy grading system; optical coherence tomography (OCT) was used for the differential diagnosis. Overall, 3,278 patients were screened; the fundus photographs, OCT scans, and self-reports were collected at the mobile clinic in a single visit.
The prevalence of AMD in the study population was 8.99% (wet AMD 1.01%; dry AMD 7.85%), whereas the extrapolated estimate in the entire Slovakian population was 3.3% (wet AMD 0.3%; dry AMD 3.0%). Age, smoking, and hypertension were risk factors associated with AMD; however, contrary to reports in the literature, no gender-specific association was observed.
Based on the results of this study, mobile clinics may be an effective way to extend health care access to a larger population. Early diagnosis of AMD will assist in early treatment and effective disease management of the population at risk.
Neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) are important vision-threatening diseases worldwide. For effective treatment, the risk factors for the diseases merit investigation. This study aimed to compare the risk factors for nAMD vs. PCV in Chinese patients.
A total of 946 participants were recruited in this case-control study, including 281 patients with nAMD, 306 patients with PCV, and 359 controls. All participants underwent comprehensive ophthalmic examinations. Information on risk factors were collected by questionnaire. Multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to investigate the difference in risk factors between nAMD and PCV. In a subgroup of subjects, serum lipid data were obtained and analyzed.
Risk factors for nAMD included older age (OR 1.03, P = 0.001), male gender (OR 1.55, P = 0.020), asthma (OR 2.50, P = 0.028), smoking (OR 1.92, P = 0.001), and family history (OR 6.82, P = 0.001), while smoking (OR 1.67, P = 0.013) was the only risk factor for PCV. Compared to patients with PCV, patients with nAMD were more likely to be older and suffer from hyperlipidemia, coronary artery disease, rheumatism, and tumor. Interestingly, higher levels of high-density lipoprotein were positively associated with PCV in the subgroup analysis (OR 7.74, P = 0.011). Besides, results were quite different between the combination of patients with nAMD and PCV and patients with nAMD or PCV alone.
The risk factors for nAMD and PCV is varying with the exception of smoking. Our findings suggest that different strategies might be applied in the clinical management and scientific research on nAMD and PCV.
Numerous population-based studies of age-related macular degeneration have been reported around the world, with the results of some studies suggesting racial or ethnic differences in disease prevalence. Integrating these resources to provide summarised data to establish worldwide prevalence and to project the number of people with age-related macular degeneration from 2020 to 2040 would be a useful guide for global strategies.
We did a systematic literature review to identify all population-based studies of age-related macular degeneration published before May, 2013. Only studies using retinal photographs and standardised grading classifications (the Wisconsin age-related maculopathy grading system, the international classification for age-related macular degeneration, or the Rotterdam staging system) were included. Hierarchical Bayesian approaches were used to estimate the pooled prevalence, the 95% credible intervals (CrI), and to examine the difference in prevalence by ethnicity (European, African, Hispanic, Asian) and region (Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, North America, and Oceania). UN World Population Prospects were used to project the number of people affected in 2014 and 2040. Bayes factor was calculated as a measure of statistical evidence, with a score above three indicating substantial evidence.
Analysis of 129,664 individuals (aged 30-97 years), with 12,727 cases from 39 studies, showed the pooled prevalence (mapped to an age range of 45-85 years) of early, late, and any age-related macular degeneration to be 8.01% (95% CrI 3.98-15.49), 0.37% (0.18-0.77), and 8.69% (4.26-17.40), respectively. We found a higher prevalence of early and any age-related macular degeneration in Europeans than in Asians (early: 11.2% vs 6.8%, Bayes factor 3.9; any: 12.3% vs 7.4%, Bayes factor 4.3), and early, late, and any age-related macular degeneration to be more prevalent in Europeans than in Africans (early: 11.2% vs 7.1%, Bayes factor 12.2; late: 0.5% vs 0.3%, 3.7; any: 12.3% vs 7.5%, 31.3). There was no difference in prevalence between Asians and Africans (all Bayes factors <1). Europeans had a higher prevalence of geographic atrophy subtype (1.11%, 95% CrI 0.53-2.08) than Africans (0.14%, 0.04-0.45), Asians (0.21%, 0.04-0.87), and Hispanics (0.16%, 0.05-0.46). Between geographical regions, cases of early and any age-related macular degeneration were less prevalent in Asia than in Europe and North America (early: 6.3% vs 14.3% and 12.8% [Bayes factor 2.3 and 7.6]; any: 6.9% vs 18.3% and 14.3% [3.0 and 3.8]). No significant gender effect was noted in prevalence (Bayes factor <1.0). The projected number of people with age-related macular degeneration in 2020 is 196 million (95% CrI 140-261), increasing to 288 million in 2040 (205-399).
These estimates indicate the substantial global burden of age-related macular degeneration. Summarised data provide information for understanding the effect of the condition and provide data towards designing eye-care strategies and health services around the world.
National Medical Research Council, Singapore.
Various hypoxia-related proteins are differentially expressed in the retina and secreted to the vitreous and/or aqueous humor of patients affected by dry or neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD). To determine whether these conditions alter concentrations of cytokines also in the systemic circulation, we measured plasma levels of six hypoxia-related proteins.
Plasma was prepared from EDTA blood that was collected from patients affected by dry AMD (n = 5), nAMD (n = 11), proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR; n = 9), and patients with an epiretinal membrane (ERM; n = 11). ERM samples served as negative controls, PDR samples as positive controls. Protein concentrations of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), erythropoietin (EPO), angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4), placental growth factor (PlGF), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
The concentration of PlGF was significantly increased in plasma of patients affected by nAMD. Although no statistically significant differences were found for EPO, ANGPTL4, PlGF, TNF-α, and PEDF, the mean concentration of VEGF was lowest in the nAMD group. Plasma concentrations of the six factors did not correlate with gender or age of patients.
nAMD may increase plasma concentrations of PlGF, making it a candidate as a biomarker for the neovascular form of AMD. Other factors, however, were not differentially regulated, suggesting that their systemic concentrations are not generally increased in hypoxia-related retinal diseases.
To explore the association of use versus no use and the influence of pack-year use of smokeless tobacco with that of early and late age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in rural and urban south Indian population. We hypothesized that the use and pack-years of use would be significantly associated with both early and late AMD. We therefore sought to examine subjects who gave a history of using smokeless tobacco and we quantified the usage as pack-years, to examine the association with that of early and late AMD.
This was part of Sankara Nethralaya: Rural-Urban Age-related Macular degeneration study (SN-RAM study), which was conducted between 2007 and 2010. Subjects aged 60 years or older or those turning 60 in the present calendar year, with a history of using smokeless tobacco were noted along with duration and number of packs used per day. Smokeless tobacco was defined as chewed-tobacco (loose leaves) and/or snuff (finely chopped tobacco). Subjects underwent detailed ophthalmic evaluation including cataract grading using the Lens Opacities Classification System (LOCS III), 45° 4-field stereoscopic fundus photography and AMD evaluation. Pack-years of smokeless tobacco use was stratified as <15, 15-34 and ≥35 years; the association of tobacco use and pack-years of use with that of early and late AMD was examined. A p value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
The number of smokeless tobacco users was significantly higher in rural (n = 767) than in urban groups (n = 281), p < 0.001. Of the 1048 users, 238 subjects (23%) provided details regarding quantification of use. There were no significant differences in the pack-years between rural and urban areas, p = 0.756 or that between AMD and no AMD, p = 0.562. Use of smokeless tobacco compared with no use was significantly associated with late AMD, OR= 3.178, 95%CI: 1.095, 9.227, p = 0.033, when adjusted for age, gender, rural-urban differences, presence of diabetes, socioeconomic status, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, low-density and high-density lipoprotein levels. The association was not significant for early AMD, p = 0.582. The pack-years of use did not show a statistically significant association with early or late AMD. Furthermore, out of the 1048 subjects, 547 reported as using areca nut. Of which, 415 (75.8%) subjects had no AMD, 119 (21.7%) showed evidence of early AMD and 13 (2.4%) had late AMD. There was no significant association between the use of areca nut and early AMD, (X<sup>2</sup> (1, N = 930) = 2.345, p = 0.126) or with that of late AMD (X<sup>2</sup> (1, N = 761) = 0.075, p = 0.785).
Smokeless tobacco use compared with no use, is associated with late AMD, regardless of the pack-years of use. Tobacco use is a modifiable risk factor. Efforts to reduce or stop the use of smokeless tobacco is indicated in an effort to prevent vision loss with respect to late AMD.
Individual variation in response and duration of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy is seen among patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Identification of genetic markers that affect clinical response may result in optimization of anti-VEGF therapy.
To evaluate the pharmacogenetic relationship between genotypes of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the VEGF signaling pathway and response to treatment with ranibizumab or bevacizumab for neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
In total, 835 of 1149 patients (72.7%) participating in the Comparison of Age-Related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials (CATT) at 43 CATT clinical centers.
Each patient was genotyped for 7 SNPs in VEGFA (rs699946, rs699947, rs833069, rs833070, rs1413711, rs2010963, and rs2146323) and 1 SNP in VEGFR2 (rs2071559) using TaqMan SNP genotyping assays.
Genotypic frequencies were compared with clinical measures of response to therapy at 1 year, including the mean visual acuity, mean change in visual acuity, at least a 15-letter increase, retinal thickness, mean change in total foveal thickness, presence of fluid on optical coherence tomography, presence of leakage on fluorescein angiography, mean change in lesion size, and mean number of injections administered. Differences in response by genotype were evaluated with tests of linear trend calculated from logistic regression models for categorical outcomes and linear regression models for continuous outcomes. The method of controlling the false discovery rate was used to adjust for multiple comparisons.
For each of the measures of visual acuity evaluated, no association was observed with any of the genotypes or with the number of risk alleles. Four VEGFA SNPs demonstrated an association with retinal thickness: rs699947 (P = .03), rs833070 (P = .04), rs1413711 (P = .045), and rs2146323 (P = .006). However, adjusted P values for these associations were all statistically nonsignificant (range, P = .24 to P = .45). Among the participants in 2 as-needed groups, no association was found in the number of injections among the different genotypes or for the total number of risk alleles. The effect of risk alleles on each clinical measure did not differ by treatment group, drug, or dosing regimen (P > .01 for all).
This study provides evidence that no pharmacogenetic associations exist between the studied VEGFA and VEGFR2 SNPs and response to anti-VEGF therapy.
clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00593450.
To determine the efficacy of monthly (0.1 mL/4 mg) aflibercept for refractory neovascular age-related macular degeneration (wet age-related macular degeneration).
This was a retrospective interventional case series in which patients with wet age-related macular degeneration were treated with stepwise dose escalation. Nonvitrectomized patients resistant to monthly (Q4W) ranibizumab/bevacizumab were switched to 2 mg aflibercept every 8 weeks. With resistance, they were escalated to Q4W 2 mg aflibercept, then Q4W 4 mg (high dose high frequency, 4Q4W) aflibercept. Resistance was defined as ≥2 recurrences after being dry following ≥3 injections or persistent exudation on treatment of ≥5 injections.
Thirty-three eyes of 28 patients were treated with 4Q4W aflibercept and followed for a mean of 16 months. A dry retina (no intraretinal or subretinal fluid) was achieved after initiating 4Q4W aflibercept treatment at a mean of 3.8 months. Central foveal thickness, maximum foveal thickness, intraretinal fluid, subretinal fluid, and retinal pigment detachment height decreased significantly at 1 month after initiating the 4Q4W aflibercept, and the morphologic therapeutic effect was sustained until the last visit. Forty-five percent of eyes had one or more lines of vision improvement. New geographic atrophy developed in 9% of eyes during follow-up. No ocular or systemic adverse events occurred after initiating 4Q4W aflibercept.
Intravitreal high-dose high-frequency aflibercept is an effective treatment for patients with refractory wet age-related macular degeneration.
The PONS study was conceived to analyze the extent of nonpersistence (NP) and nonadherence (NA) in the treatment of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration in everyday clinical practice in Germany. Further objectives were to identify factors that can affect NP and NA and to analyze clinical outcomes under everyday conditions.
Nonpersistence (no contact with doctor for at least 3 months) and NA (no treatment or follow-up for at least 6 weeks) as well as clinical data were analyzed up to 24 months retrospectively and 12 months prospectively in 480 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration in 23 treatment centers. Patients were interviewed for factors possibly affecting NP and NA.
One third of patients fulfilled criteria of NA in the first 3 months and two thirds after 6 months. The NP was 18.8% after 12 months. Treatment exclusively at one center, a higher number of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration at the treating center, and fixed appointments were associated with a lower risk for NP. An initial gain in visual acuity after upload was not preserved after 12 months (mean change -0.5 Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study letters). Whereas visual acuity declined by 7.5 Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study letters in patients with good baseline visual acuity >20/40, visual acuity improved by 8.5 letters in patients with baseline visual acuity of ≤20/200. Only 7.5% of patients underwent an optical coherence tomography scan after 3 upload injections, and only 2.0 optical coherence tomographies were performed in the first 12 months.
The NP and NA were high in our study population and are likely to have contributed to a suboptimal clinical outcome compared with randomized clinical trials. Shortcomings in the management of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration, including restrictions in the timely and adequate follow-up (including optical coherence tomography) and retreatment, appear to be constraining factors in Germany.
To describe the association between morphologic features on fundus photography (FP), fluorescein angiography (FA), and optical coherence tomography (OCT) and visual acuity (VA) in the second year of the Comparison of Age-related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials (CATT).
Prospective cohort study within a randomized clinical trial.
Participants in the CATT.
Study eye eligibility required angiographic and OCT evidence of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) secondary to age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and VA between 20/25 and 20/320. Treatment was assigned randomly to ranibizumab or bevacizumab with 3 different dosing regimens over a 2-year period.
Fluid type, location, and thickness; retina and subretinal tissue complex thickness on OCT; size and lesion composition on FP and FA; and VA.
Among 1185 CATT participants, 993 (84%) had fluid on OCT at baseline and completed 2 years of follow-up. At 2 years, intraretinal fluid (IRF), subretinal fluid (SRF), sub-retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) fluid, and subretinal tissue complex thickness decreased in all treatment groups. Ranibizumab monthly was best able to resolve each type of fluid. Eyes with SRF in the foveal center on OCT had better mean VA than eyes with no SRF (72.8 vs. 66.6 letters; P = 0.006). Eyes with IRF in the foveal center had worse mean VA than eyes without IRF (59.9 vs. 70.9 letters; P < 0.0001). Eyes with retinal thickness <120 μm had worse VA compared with eyes with retinal thickness 120 to 212 and >212 μm (59.4 vs. 71.3 vs. 70.3 letters; P < 0.0001). At 2 years, the mean VA (letters) of eyes varied substantially by the type of subfoveal pathology on FP and FA: 70.6 for no pathology; 74.1 for fluid only; 73.3 for CNV or pigment epithelial (RPE) detachment; 68.4 for nongeographic atrophy; and 62.9 for geographic atrophy, hemorrhage, RPE tear, or scar (P < 0.0001).
The associations between VA and morphologic features identified through year 1 were maintained or strengthened during year 2. Eyes with foveal IRF, abnormally thin retina, greater thickness of the subretinal tissue complex on OCT, and subfoveal geographic atrophy or scar on FP/FA had the worst VA. Subretinal fluid was associated with better VA.
To assess the association between age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and previous cataract surgery.
We studied 17,987 randomly selected participants from the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey who were aged ≥40 years and underwent additional ophthalmologic examinations in 2008‒12. The associations between previous cataract surgery and early/late AMD were identified using multivariate logistic regression analysis of data from right or left eyes. Clustered multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed using both eyes to assess inter-eye correlation in same subject. Previous cataract surgery and cataract subtypes were based on slit-lamp examination without pupil dilation. Early and late AMD diagnoses were based on non-mydriatic digital retinal image.
By univariate logistic regression, both early and late AMD prevalence were higher in subjects with pseudophakia/aphakia compared to subjects with cataract as a reference group, or subjects with phakic eye (including clear lens) as a reference group. In univariate logistic regression, both early and late AMD prevalence were higher in eyes with cataract or pseudo/aphakia compared to eyes with clear lens. However, after adjusting for age with multivariate logistic regression, all statistically significant differences in AMD prevalence among subgroups disappeared.
We found no association between the previous cataract surgery and increased early/late AMD risk in our representative, large, national patient database. This suggests that increasing age, and not cataract surgery history, is predictive of AMD risk. These findings are limited by cross-sectional study and need to be replicated by other longitudinal observational studies.
The Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) and AREDS2 provided evidence for treating persons with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) with antioxidant vitamins and minerals to reduce the risk of development of late AMD. The AREDS2 data suggest that the beta-carotene in the original AREDS supplements be replaced by lutein and zeaxanthin, providing a safer drug for those who are smokers or former smokers. Even though consuming fish reduced the risk of AMD in observational studies, the AREDS2 results showed that omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (docosahexaenoic acid/eicosapentaenoic acid) had no beneficial effect on AMD. Despite the major progress in the discovery of gene variants associated with AMD, the use of genetic testing to predict disease has not been clinically useful. The use of genetic testing prior to AMD therapies such as administering AREDS supplements is not recommended by the American Academy of Ophthalmology and other organizations.
Clinical evidence supports the efficacy of bimonthly aflibercept injection for age-related macular degeneration.
The study aimed to evaluate aqueous vascular endothelial growth factor and aflibercept concentrations and the efficacy of bimonthly aflibercept in patients with age-related macular degeneration.
This study is a prospective, interventional case series.
Enrolled were 35 eyes with exudative age-related macular degeneration from 35 patients.
Patients received three bimonthly intravitreal aflibercept without loading doses. We collected the aqueous humor just before each injection, measured vascular endothelial growth factor and aflibercept concentrations by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and measured best-corrected visual acuity and central retinal subfield thickness before and after the injections.
Aqueous vascular endothelial growth factor and aflibercept concentrations were measured.
The vascular endothelial growth factor concentration was 135.4 ± 60.5 pg/mL (mean ± standard deviation, range 60.6-323.4) at baseline and below the lowest detectable limit in all eyes at month 2 and in 32 eyes at month 4 (P < 0.001 [month 2] and P < 0.001 [month 4]). The mean aflibercept concentration was 20.3 ng/mL at month 2 and 28.0 ng/mL at month 4. The mean logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution visual acuity improved from 0.50 ± 0.36 at baseline to 0.36 ± 0.40 at month 6 (P < 0.001). The mean central retinal subfield thickness decreased from 353 ± 100 μm at baseline to 236 ± 45 μm at month 6 (P < 0.001).
Bimonthly aflibercept injections without loading doses may be considered a treatment option for age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) affects the macula and is the leading cause of significant and irreversible central visual loss. It is the most common cause of visual loss in people aged more than 60 years. This disease affects 2.5 million individuals in Europe. AMD is caused by both environmental and genetic factors. Numerous risk factors have been reported, but the pathogenesis of AMD is complex and fairly understood. Age, female gender, obesity, race, education status, family history, hyperopia, iris color, cigarette smoking, previous cataract surgery, history of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease, diabetes, sunlight exposure and many other factors have been shown to be associated with AMD development. Scientific evidence shows that genes may play a role in the development of nearly 3 out of 4 cases of this devastating eye disease. The genes that have been shown to be associated with AMD are genes encoding complement system components such as CFH, C2, C3, CFB, and other. 
Neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) has undergone substantial break-throughs in diagnostic as well as therapeutic respect, with optical coherence tomography (OCT) allowing to identify disease morphology in great detail, and intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy providing unprecedented benefit. However, these two paths have yet not been combined in an optimal way, real-world outcomes are inferior to expectations, and disease management is largely inefficient in the real-world setting. This dilemma can be solved by identification of valid biomarkers relevant for visual function, disease activity and prognosis, which can provide solid guidance for therapeutic management on an individual level as well as on the population base. Qualitative and quantitative morphological features obtained by advanced OCT provide novel insight into exudative and degenerative stages of neovascular AMD. However, conclusions from structure/function correlations evolve differently from previous paradigms. While central retinal thickness was used as biomarker for guiding retreatment management in clinical trials and practice, fluid localization in different compartments offers superior prognostic value: Intraretinal cystoid fluid has a negative impact on visual acuity and is considered as degenerative when persisting through the initial therapeutic interval. Subretinal fluid is associated with superior visual benefit and a lower rate of progression towards geographic atrophy. Detachment of the retinal pigment epithelium was identified as most pathognomonic biomarker, often irresponsive to therapy and responsible for visual decline during a pro-re-nata regimen. Alterations of neurosensory tissue are usually associated with irreversible loss of functional elements and a negative prognosis. Novel OCT technologies offer crucial insight into corresponding changes at the level of the photoreceptor--retinal pigment epithelial--choriocapillary unit, identifying the biological limits of therapeutic interventions. To optimally benefit from high-resolution multi-modal imaging, an integrated analysis of all functional and structural features is required involving reliable automated algorithms and computational data analyses. Using innovative analysis methods, retinal biomarkers can be used to provide efficient personalized therapy for the individual patient, predictive disease- and population-based models for large-scale management and identifying promising targets for the development of novel therapeutic strategies.
There is still no agreement on total plasma homocysteine (tHcy) role in age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the leading cause of new blindness in industrialized countries. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of the published data on the correlation between tHcy and AMD. MEDLINE/PubMed and ISI Web of Sciences searches were performed according to MOOSE guidelines. Case-control studies were eligible for inclusion. Participants and controls were AMD patients and subjects without AMD. The main outcome measure was wet AMD. Homocysteine level was the main exposure variable. Data were pooled using a random-effects model. Twelve case-control studies were identified: 10 assessed wet AMD, four dry AMD, one early AMD, one late AMD, and one any AMD. As for wet AMD, there was a total of 453 cases and 514 controls. Mean tHcy was on average 1.1 μmol/l (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.96-1.25) greater in wet AMD cases, but there was evidence of extreme between-study heterogeneity (p < 0.001, I<sup>2</sup>  = 91.8%). In a model homogenous for age, including six wet AMD studies (214 cases, 274 controls), mean tHcy was on average 0.58 μmol/l (95% CI = 0.35-0.73) greater in the case group, a not statistically significant result (p = 0.144) associated with moderate heterogeneity (I<sup>2</sup>  = 39.2%). Our meta-analysis indicates that there is some weak evidence that increased tHcy might be associated with wet AMD; however, this result should be interpreted cautiously, because of a marked between-study heterogeneity and the possible effect of publication bias. Future studies, preferably of cohort design, are necessary before any firm conclusions on the putative role of increased tHcy on AMD can be drawn.
To describe outcomes 5 years after initiating treatment with bevacizumab or ranibizumab for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Cohort study.
Patients enrolled in the Comparison of AMD Treatments Trials.
Patients were assigned randomly to ranibizumab or bevacizumab and to 1 of 3 dosing regimens. After 2 years, patients were released from the clinical trial protocol. At 5 years, patients were recalled for examination.
Visual acuity (VA) and morphologic retinal features.
Visual acuity was obtained for 647 of 914 (71%) living patients with average follow-up of 5.5 years. The mean number of examinations for AMD care after the clinical trial ended was 25.3, and the mean number of treatments was 15.4. Most patients (60%) were treated 1 time or more with a drug other than their assigned drug. At the 5-year visit, 50% of eyes had VA of 20/40 or better and 20% had VA of 20/200 or worse. Mean change in VA was -3 letters from baseline and -11 letters from 2 years. Among 467 eyes with fluorescein angiography, mean total lesion area was 12.9 mm(2), a mean of 4.8 mm(2) larger than at 2 years. Geographic atrophy was present in 213 of 515 (41%) gradable eyes and was subfoveal in 85 eyes (17%). Among 555 eyes with spectral-domain optical coherence tomography, 83% had fluid (61% intraretinal, 38% subretinal, and 36% sub-retinal pigment epithelium). Mean foveal total thickness was 278 μm, a decrease of 182 μm from baseline and 20 μm from 2 years. The retina was abnormally thin (<120 μm) in 36% of eyes. Between 2 and 5 years, the group originally assigned to ranibizumab for 2 years lost more VA than the bevacizumab group (-4 letters; P = 0.008). Otherwise, there were no statistically significant differences in VA or morphologic outcomes between drug or regimen groups.
Vision gains during the first 2 years were not maintained at 5 years. However, 50% of eyes had VA of 20/40 or better, confirming anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy as a major long-term therapeutic advance for neovascular AMD.
To study visual outcome and number of annual injections in treatment-naïve patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) before and after a change in first-line therapy from ranibizumab to aflibercept in a high-volume clinical practice.
This was a retrospective chart review of routine clinical practice. The study included 1027 treatment-naïve patients, 559 of whom started intravitreal ranibizumab therapy in 2011-2012 and 468 of whom started intravitreal aflibercept therapy in 2013-2014, a fixed loading dose of three injections followed by a pro re nata treatment regimen used in both periods.
Snellen best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at baseline and after one year was 0.23 and 0.31 (p < 0.0001), respectively, for patients treated with ranibizumab and 0.25 and 0.33 (p < 0.0001) for patients treated with aflibercept, last observation carried forward. The share of patients (73%) still in treatment with ranibizumab at year 1 had a baseline BCVA of 0.26 but 0.40 at year 1 (p < 0.0001), and the patients (75%) still in treatment with aflibercept at year 1 had a baseline BCVA of 0.28 but 0.42 at year 1 (p < 0.0001). Proportional visual gains for both cohorts were comparable for one year (p = 0.14). The number of injections given within year 1 including first injection was 6.9 for ranibizumab and 5.9 for aflibercept (p < 0.0001). In patients continuing treatment through year 1, the number of injections was 8.0 for ranibizumab and 6.6 for aflibercept (p < 0.0001). The two cohorts had similar cause-of-discontinuation profiles.
Treatment of nAMD at a single centre in two sequential cohorts yielded comparable BCVA outcomes with 15% fewer injections of aflibercept compared to ranibizumab.
The objective of our study was to review the current knowledge on Age- Related Macular Degeneration, including pathogenesis, ocular manifestations, diagnosis and ancillary testing.
Relevant publications on Age-Related Macular Degeneration that were published until 2014.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common macular disease affecting elderly people in the Western world. It is characterized by the appearance of drusen in the macula, accompanied by choroidal neovascularization (CNV) or geographic atrophy.
<i>Purpose.</i> To compare serum levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration (wAMD), patients with dry AMD (dAMD), and patients without AMD and to evaluate the efficacy of nutritional supplementation for treating elevated serum MDA in patients with wAMD. <i>Methods.</i> MDA levels were measured in sera from 20 patients with wAMD, 20 with dAMD, and 24 without AMD. Patients with wAMD were randomized to receive or not receive nutritional supplementation (10 patients in each group), and MDA levels were measured after 3 months of treatment. <i>Results.</i> MDA levels in patients with wAMD were significantly greater compared with patients without AMD. In eyes with wAMD, there was a significant correlation between MDA levels and choroidal neovascularization lesion area. Serum MDA levels decreased in most patients that received supplementation and significantly increased in those who did not. <i>Conclusion.</i> Baseline serum MDA levels were elevated in patients with wAMD, and MDA levels were directly correlated with choroidal neovascularization lesion area. In addition, nutritional supplementation appeared to exert a protective effect against oxidative stress in patients with wAMD.
Conbercept is a novel vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitor for the treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD). This systematic review aims to assess the efficacy and safety of conbercept in the treatment of wet AMD.
PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, VIP database, and Wanfang database were searched from their earliest records to June 2017. We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating the efficacy and safety of conbercept in wet AMD patients. Outcomes included the mean changes from baseline in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) score (primary outcome), central retinal thickness (CRT), plasma level of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) over time, and the incidence of adverse events (AEs).
Eighteen RCTs (1285 participants) were included in this systematic review. Conbercept might improve BCVA compared to triamcinolone acetonide [MD = 0.11, 95% CI (0.08, 0.15)], and reduce CRT compared to the other four therapies (conservative treatment, ranibizumab, transpupillary thermotherapy, and triamcinolone acetonide). The incidence of AEs in patients receiving conbercept was significantly lower than those receiving triamcinolone acetonide [RR = 0.25, 95% CI (0.09-0.72)], but was similar to the other therapies. Conbercept seemed to be more effective than ranibizumab in lowering the plasma level of VEGF [MD = - 15.86, 95% CI (- 23.17, - 8.55)].
Current evidence shows that conbercept is a promising option for the treatment of wet AMD. Nevertheless, further studies are required to compare the efficacy, long-term safety and cost-effectiveness between conbercept and other anti-VEGF agents in different populations.
In this study, we conducted an analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and a discrete choice experiment (DCE) to elicit the preferences of patients with age-related macular degeneration using identical attributes and levels.
To compare preference-based weights for age-related macular degeneration treatment attributes and levels generated by two elicitation methods. The properties of both methods were assessed, including ease of instrument use.
A DCE and an AHP experiment were designed on the basis of five attributes. Preference-based weights were generated using the matrix multiplication method for attributes and levels in AHP and a mixed multinomial logit model for levels in the DCE. Attribute importance was further compared using coefficient (DCE) and weight (AHP) level ranges. The questionnaire difficulty was rated on a qualitative scale. Patients were asked to think aloud while providing their judgments.
AHP and DCE generated similar results regarding levels, stressing a preference for visual improvement, frequent monitoring, on-demand and less frequent injection schemes, approved drugs, and mild side effects. Attribute weights derived on the basis of level ranges led to a ranking that was opposite to the AHP directly calculated attribute weights. For example, visual function ranked first in the AHP and last on the basis of level ranges.
The results across the methods were similar, with one exception: the directly measured AHP attribute weights were different from the level-based interpretation of attribute importance in both DCE and AHP. The dependence/independence of attribute importance on level ranges in DCE and AHP, respectively, should be taken into account when choosing a method to support decision making.
Advanced age-related macular degeneration (AAMD) is a complex sight-threating disease of public health significance. Micro RNAs (miRNAs) have been proposed as biomarkers for AAMD. The presence of certain single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may influence the explanatory value of these biomarkers. Here we present findings from an integrated approach used to determine whether AAMD-associated SNPs have the capacity to influence miRNA-mRNA pairing and, if so, to what extent such pairing may be manifested in a discrete AAMD transcriptome. Using a panel of 8854 SNPs associated with AAMD at p-values ≤5.0E-7 from a cohort of >30,000 elderly people, we identified SNPs in miRNA target-encoding constituents of: (1) regulator of complement activation (RCA) genes (rs390679, CFHR1, p≤2.14E-214 | rs12140421, CFHR3, p≤4.63E-29); (2) genes of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) loci (rs4151672, CFB, p≤8.91E-41 | rs115404146, HLA-C, p≤6.32E-12 | rs1055821, HLA-B, p≤1.93E-9 | rs1063355, HLA-DQB1, p≤6.82E-14); and (3) genes of the 10q26 AAMD locus (rs1045216, PLEKHA1, p≤4.17E-142 | rs2672603, ARMS2, p≤7.14E-46). We used these findings with existing data on AAMD-related retinal miRNA and transcript profiles for the purpose of making inferences on SNP-mRNA-miRNA-AAMD relationships. Four of 12 miRNAs significantly elevated in AAMD retina (hsa-miR-155-5p, hsa-let-7a-5p, hsa-let-7b-5p hsa-let-7d-5p) also showed strong pairing capacity (TarBase 7.1 context++ score <-0.2, miRanda 3.3 pairing score >150) with miRNA target transcripts encoded by AAMD-associated SNPs resident in HLA-DQB1 (rs1063355, hsa-miR-155-5p) and TGFBR1 (rs868, hsa-let-7). Three of the 12 miRNAs overexpressed in AAMD retina are inducible by NFkB and have high affinity targets in the complement factor H (CFH) mRNA 3' UTR. We used ENSEMBL to identify polymorphic regions in the CFH mRNA 3' UTR with the capacity to disrupt miRNA-mRNA pairing. Two variants (rs766666504 and rs459598) existed in DNA sequence encoding the seed region of hsa-miR-146a-5p in the CFH mRNA 3' UTR - as this miRNA is also elevated in both vitreous and serum of people with AAMD, it shows great value as a biomarker. Our findings suggest that knowledge on the nature of DNA sequence variation may increase the explanatory power of miRNA biomarkers in genetically diverse populations, while yielding information with which to develop: (1) mechanistic tests on processes implicated in AMD pathogenesis; and, (2) site-specific small molecules (synthetic mimetics or anti-miRNAs) with preventive or therapeutic efficacy for AAMD.
The complement factor H R1210C rare variant confers the strongest genetic risk for age-related macular degeneration and earlier age at onset; however, its associated phenotype has not been well characterized.
To describe specific fundus features of a white population with the R1210C rare variant.
Fundus features specific for diagnosis and disease staging were retrospectively characterized by systematic review of all available fundus images for each patient, including color photography, fluorescein angiography, fundus autofluorescence, and optical coherence tomography, at a tertiary ophthalmologic referral center. For this retrospective observational study conducted from 2012 to 2014, enrolled patients with the variant and their family members without the variant were identified from the Age-Related Macular Degeneration Study for a family-based study arm. For patients with the variant but without a family member enrolled in the study, age-matched comparison individuals without the variant were selected randomly from the database.
The presence of drusen in the macula (macular drusen score) and estimated number (total macular drusen score) were assessed. The presence of drusen in the extramacular regions (extramacular drusen score), pigmentary abnormalities, and disease staging were also evaluated. Binary logistic regression models were used to evaluate the association between rare variant status and ocular phenotypes.
Images from a total of 143 patients (283 eyes), including 62 patients with the rare variant, were analyzed. Drusen score covariates were associated with the R1210C rare variant. A larger proportion of patients carrying the variant had the highest level of macular and total macular drusen scores compared with those without the variant (57.9% vs 16.7% and 52.9% vs 14.2%, respectively; P for trend < .001 for both scores). Patients carrying the rare variant had a much greater likelihood of having advanced disease (odds ratio, 7.0; 95% CI, 3.1-16.2; P < .001). A higher prevalence of geographic atrophy was observed among patients carrying the variant (odds ratio, 13.7; 95% CI, 5.0-37.7; P < .001).
The typical phenotype of the complement factor H R1210C rare variant is associated with extensive drusen accumulation in the macula and throughout the fundus, as well as with a high risk for having advanced disease. Better characterization of genetic profiles in age-related macular degeneration may be important for screening and future therapeutic strategies for this vision-threatening condition.
Lutein and zeaxanthin are suggested micronutrient supplements to prevent the progression of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a leading cause of blindness worldwide. To monitor the levels of lutein/zeaxanthin in the macula, macular pigment optical density (MPOD) is measured. A commercially available device (MPSII®, Elektron Technology, Switzerland), using technology based on heterochromatic flicker photometry, can measure both absolute and estimated values of MPOD. However, whether the estimated value is applicable to Asian individuals and/or AMD patients remains to be determined.
The absolute and estimated values of MPOD were measured using the MPSII® device in 77 participants with a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) > 0.099 (logMAR score).
The studied eyes included 17 young (20-29 years) healthy, 26 aged (>50 years) healthy, 18 aged and AMD-fellow, and 16 aged AMD eyes. The mean BCVA among the groups were not significantly different. Both absolute and estimated values were measurable in all eyes of young healthy group. However, absolute values were measurable in only 57.7%, 66.7%, and 43.8%, of the aged healthy, AMD-fellow, and AMD groups, respectively, and 56.7% of the eyes included in the 3 aged groups. In contrast, the estimated value was measurable in 84.6%, 88.9% and 93.8% of the groups, respectively, and 88.3% of eyes in the pooled aged group. The estimated value was correlated with absolute value in individuals from all groups by Spearman's correlation coefficient analyses (young healthy: R<sup>2</sup> = 0.885, P = 0.0001; aged healthy: R<sup>2</sup> = 0.765, P = 0.001; AMD-fellow: R<sup>2</sup> = 0.851, P = 0.0001; and AMD: R<sup>2</sup> = 0.860, P = 0.013). Using the estimated value, significantly lower MPOD values were found in aged AMD-related eyes, which included both AMD-fellow and AMD eyes, compared with aged healthy eyes by Student's t-test (P = 0.02).
Absolute, in contrast to estimated, value was measurable in a limited number of aged participants; however, it was correlated with estimated value both in young and aged Asian populations with or without AMD. These results may inform future clinical studies investigating the measurement of MPOD in understanding the role of macular pigments in the pathogenesis of AMD.
Neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) is the leading cause of vision loss among persons aged 65 years and older. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) treatment is the recommended standard of care. The current study compares the effectiveness of ranibizumab in routine clinical practice in two countries that generally apply two different treatment regimens, treat-and-extend (T&E) in Australia or pro re nata (PRN) in the UK.
This retrospective, comparative, non-randomised cohort study is based on patients' data from electronic medical record (EMR) databases in Australia and the UK. Treatment regimens were defined based on location, with Australia as a proxy for analysing T&E and UK as a proxy for analysing PRN. The study included patients with a diagnosis of nAMD who started treatment with ranibizumab between January 2009 and July 2014. A total of 647 eyes of 570 patients in Australia and 3187 eyes of 2755 patients in the UK with complete 12-months follow-up were analysed.
Baseline patient characteristics were comparable between the two cohorts. After 1 year of treatment, T&E-treated eyes achieved higher mean (±SE) visual acuity (VA) gains (5.00 ± 0.54 letters [95% confidence interval (CI) 3.93-6.06]) than PRN-treated eyes [3.04 ± 0.24 letters (95% CI 2.57-3.51); difference in means 2.07 ± 0.69 (95% CI 0.73-3.41), p < 0.001]. Non-inferiority of T&E compared to PRN was concluded based on the change in mean visual acuity gains at 12 months. Over the 12-month follow-up, T&E-treated eyes received a higher mean [±standard deviation (SD)] number of injections (9.29 ± 2.43) than PRN-treated eyes (6.04 ± 2.19) (p < 0.0001). Australian patients had a lower mean (±SD) number of total clinic visits (10.29 ± 2.90) than UK patients (11.47 ± 2.93) (p < 0.0001).
The higher injection frequency in the T&E cohort may account for the trend toward improved vision.
Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
To evaluate the size and location of macular atrophy in eyes with Type-1 neovascularization (NV) and age-related macular degeneration receiving chronic intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy.
A retrospective review of a case series of 27 eyes with Type-1 NV and retinal pigment epithelial detachment (PED) having a minimum of 12 months follow-up was performed. Demographic information and visual acuity at baseline and the final follow-up were collected. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) and near-infrared reflectance were analyzed at 6-month intervals to detect and measure macular atrophy. Location and area (in square millimeter) of macular atrophy were measured using Heidelberg software tools. Also, OCT angiography was used to colocalize the area of Type-1 NV flow versus the location of atrophy.
Twenty-seven eyes of 27 patients were included in this analysis. The median visual acuity was 20/50, mean age was 82.7 years, and mean number of injections was 29.5. A larger percentage of eyes (59.3%) developed atrophy predominantly eccentric to the PED versus predominantly overlying the PED (11.1%) when measured with spectral-domain OCT and near-infrared imaging. At the final follow-up, there was a larger area of atrophy surrounding the fibrovascular PED (mean, 3.326 mm) than overlying it (mean, 0.542 mm), and this was statistically significant (P = 0.0118). En-face OCT images were overlaid with OCT angiography in 11 eyes, and a predominantly eccentric pattern of atrophy was identified in 9 of 11 eyes. Using this method, the mean area of atrophy predominantly overlying the Type-1 NV was 1.652 mm (range of 0-10.464 mm), whereas the area of atrophy predominantly eccentric to the neovascular complex was 4.345 mm (range of 0.705-13.758 mm), and this was statistically significant (P = 0.0465). The average rate of atrophy progression was 1.04 mm/year (SD 0.938).
With long-term anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy for eyes with Type-1 NV secondary to age-related macular degeneration, macular atrophy tends to develop predominantly eccentric to the PED and the neovascular flow imaged on OCT angiography. With chronic vascular endothelial growth factor suppression, Type-1 NV may evolve into a multilayered PED that may confer a protective effect to the overlying retinal pigment epithelium and outer retina.
To describe bridge arch-shaped serous retinal detachment (SRD) in exudative age-related macular degeneration and evaluate its functional outcomes.
In this monocentric, retrospective, noncomparative case series, patients were included. Patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration and bridge arch-shaped SRD treated with ranibizumab were included. Anatomical patterns of SRD and functional outcomes were assessed.
Twenty-two eyes with bridge arch-shaped SRD of 22 patients with age-related macular degeneration were included. Serous retinal detachments were characterized by a steep angle at the junction between the retinal pigment epithelium and the sensory retina (mean, 53.45 ± 12.5°), and characterized by the presence of adhesion areas between the sensory retina and a fibrous complex developed from the choroidal neovascularization. In 15 eyes, the choroidal neovascularization was classic choroidal neovascularization and a fibrotic evolution was observed. Serous retinal detachments were compartmentalized in 14 eyes, leading to a multipocket structure. Visual acuity decreased from 49.9 ± 19.2 letters (20/100) to 40.3 ± 18.6 letters (20/160), corresponding to a mean change of -9.6 ± 19.4 letters.
This was the first study to describe the specific morphologic features of bridge arch-shaped SRD, a previously undescribed type of SRD complicating exudative age-related macular degeneration. Patients with bridge arch-shaped SRD responded to intravitreal injections of ranibizumab, but their visual prognosis was unfavorable, compared with the literature. The presence of bridge arch-shaped SRD seemed to be a marker for the fibrotic evolution of the choroidal neovascularization.
To compare the enlargement rate of macular atrophy (ERMA) in eyes treated with ranibizumab monthly or using a treat-and-extend (TREX) regimen for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) or fellow control eyes, as well as analyze risk factors for macular atrophy (MA) development and progression.
Eighteen-month, multicenter, randomized, controlled clinical trial.
Sixty patients with treatment-naïve neovascular AMD in 1 eye randomized 1:2 to monthly or TREX ranibizumab.
Patients' study and fellow eyes were followed for 18 months using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD OCT) and fundus autofluorescence (FAF) imaging. The MA was quantified on FAF images using Heidelberg Region Finder software (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany), with suspected areas of atrophy confirmed by SD OCT and infrared reflectance imaging. For eyes without baseline MA yet developed MA by 18 months, intervening visits were assessed to determine the first visit at which MA appeared to define progression rates. Foveal choroidal thickness (FCT), subretinal hyperreflective material (SHRM), and pigment epithelial detachment (PED), were assessed at baseline to determine whether they influenced MA progression.
Mean ERMA at 18 months. Relationship between visual acuity and MA, and the baseline risk factors for ERMA were also assessed.
The final analysis cohort included 88 eyes in 3 groups: monthly (n = 19), TREX (n = 30), and control fellow eyes (n = 39). Mean ERMA over 18 months was 0.39±0.67 (monthly), 1.1±1.9 (TREX), and 0.49±1 mm<sup>2</sup> (control, P = 0.12). Mean ERMA per group among the 40.9% (n = 36) of baseline patients with MA was 0.9±1, 1.9±2.2, and 1±1.3 mm<sup>2</sup>, respectively (P = 0.31). The incidence rate of MA in the 3 groups was 40%, 0%, and 8.3%, respectively. Mann-Whitney U test revealed a statistically significant association between baseline FCT (127±46 vs. 155±55 μm, P = 0.01) and SHRM thickness (106±131 vs. 50±85 μm, P = 0.02) on MA. In eyes with no baseline MA, presence of SHRM, SHRM, and PED thickness, and presence of baseline hemorrhage were all significant predictors of new MA development (P = 0.04, 0.01, 0.04, 0.004, 0.01, respectively).
Ranibizumab did not show a statistically significant influence on new MA development in eyes with neovascular AMD, whether dosed monthly or per TREX regimen. The FCT, SHRM thickness, and hemorrhage at baseline were all significant predictors of new MA.
To assess the incidence, characteristics, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central macular thickness (CMT), and retinal sensitivity correlations in patients with and without outer retinal tubulation (ORT) affected by subfoveal choroidal neovascularization due to neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Prospective case series including 78 eyes of 78 consecutive patients with subfoveal choroidal neovascularization due to neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Baseline and follow-up visits included BCVA, intraocular pressure, ophthalmoscopic examination, CMT as measured by spectral domain optical coherence tomography, and retinal sensitivity tested with fundus-related perimetry (MP-1). Fluorescent angiography was performed at baseline.
At the end of the follow-up period, the mean BCVA and CMT of patients with ORT were statistically different from those without ORT (BCVA: 0.61 ± 0.13 vs. 0.37 ± 1.59, P < 0.0001; CMT: 290 ± 26.7 vs. 215.2 ± 33.5 μm; P < 0.0001). Patients with ORT showed a decreased mean retinal sensitivity compared with patients without ORT (6.31 ± 2.5 dB vs. 9.89 ± 5.43 dB; P < 0.0001).
The results of this study investigating the BCVA, CMT, and retinal sensitivity detected by MP-1 between patients with and without ORT in neovascular age-related macular degeneration suggest that these parameters are statistically different in patients with ORT; this may be due to the pathogenesis of ORT formation, secondary to retinal pigment epithelial tears or photoreceptor damage. MP-1 microperimeter is a noninvasive instrument that provides useful information to better characterize the functional aspect of ORT in patients with age-related macular degeneration.
Anti-VEGF therapies have revolutionized the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
The goal of this study was to evaluate the "real life" visual and anatomical outcomes of aflibercept treatment for treatment-naive patients with exudative AMD.
This was a retrospective study of patients treated with aflibercept in the department of Ophthalmology at the University Hospital of Bordeaux between November 2013 and July 2015. The follow-up period varied from 3months to 2years. All patients received an induction phase with 3monthly intravitreal injections (IVT) followed by personalized monitoring. ETDRS best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), fundus examination and OCT were performed at each visit. Data were collected at day 0, 3 months, 6, 9, 12months, 18 and 24months.
Forty-three eyes of forty patients, mean age 77.7years, were included, with a minimum of 3months follow-up. Twenty-five eyes were followed for 1year; 5 eyes for two years. At baseline, the mean BCVA was 55.7 letters. Patients received 7.5 injections on average the first year and 2.6 the 2nd year. The mean gain of visual acuity was +7.3 letters at 3 months, +6.2 letters at 12 months, and +6.8 letters at 2years. Anatomically, the OCT data showed a decline of all parameters. The central macular thickness decreased by 118.3μm at 3months, 136.4μm at 12months and 65.5μm at 2years.
Aflibercept can achieve effective visual and anatomical outcomes with results, which approach the pivotal studies, despite the use of personalized protocols and longer monitoring intervals.
The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical implications of required retreatment after 3-monthly intravitreal ranibizumab (IVR) injections followed by as-needed reinjections up to 5 years in eyes with exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
A retrospective cohort study was conducted for 165 treatment-naïve eyes from 165 patients with exudative AMD. Visual changes were investigated in terms of the required retreatments.
Retreatment-free proportions were 37.0, 23.7, 16.6, 12.1, and 10.5% at 12, 24, 36, 48, and 60 months, respectively. Visual changes were significantly better in eyes which did not require retreatment at every yearly checkpoint within the 5 years. A multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that requirement of additional IVR treatments in the first 12-24 months was associated with the T allele (risk allele) of ARMS2 A69S (p = 0.010 and 0.015, respectively). Cox regression analysis revealed that older age (p = 0.046) and the T allele of ARMS2 A69S (p = 0.036) were associated with required retreatment within the 5-year follow-up period.
Age and the T allele of ARMS2 A69S are the risk factors requiring retreatments, leading to poor visual change in eyes with exudative AMD following the initial 3-monthly IVR.
To evaluate the effect of cataract surgery on disease activation and visual outcomes in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
In this retrospective case-control study, study arm consisted of neovascular AMD patients, who underwent phacoemulsification surgery. Patients did not have any disease activation at least 6 months before the inclusion, and all had at least 12-month follow-up thereafter. Control group consisted of phakic patients, who did not undergo eye surgery during the study period. Primary outcomes were the presence of the disease activation and the change in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA).
A total of 114 neovascular AMD patients [55 (48%) in exudative group and 59 (52%) in disciform group] were included. Preoperative logMAR BCVA was significantly improved after cataract surgery [0.8 (0.6-1.0) vs. 0.4 (0.4-0.7), P < 0.001 in exudative AMD; 1.85 (1.1-1.9) vs. 1.09 (0.8-1.9), P = 0.001 in disciform scar], but this improvement was not maintained during the study period in patients with both exudative AMD and disciform scar [0.6 (0.3-1.1), P = 0.313 in exudative AMD; 1.30 (1-1.9), P = 0.03 in disciform scar]. The incidence of disease activation was not statistically significant between surgery and control groups in patients with exudative AMD [5 (25%) patients in surgery group and 8 (22%) patients in the control group, P = 0.886, Cox proportional hazards regression analysis]. In disciform scar, disease activation was observed in 4 (17%) patients in the surgery group; however, no patient in the control group had disease activation (P = 0.009, HRs could not be estimated, 95% CI 0.001-43.49, Cox proportional hazards regression analysis).
Cataract surgery has benefit on early postoperative visual improvement in patients with neovascular AMD. The incidence of disease activation was not affected after surgery in exudative AMD.
The purpose of this study was to use a cross-sectional prevalence-based health care economic survey to ascertain the annual, incremental, societal ophthalmic costs associated with neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Consecutive patients (n = 200) with neovascular age-related macular degeneration were studied. A Control Cohort included patients with good (20/20-20/25) vision, while Study Cohort vision levels included Subcohort 1: 20/30 to 20/50, Subcohort 2: 20/60 to 20/100, Subcohort 3: 20/200 to 20/400, and Subcohort 4: 20/800 to no light perception. An interviewer-administered, standardized, written survey assessed 1) direct ophthalmic medical, 2) direct nonophthalmic medical, 3) direct nonmedical, and 4) indirect medical costs accrued due solely to neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
The mean annual societal cost for the Control Cohort was $6,116 and for the Study Cohort averaged $39,910 (P < 0.001). Study Subcohort 1 costs averaged $20,339, while Subcohort 4 costs averaged $82,984. Direct ophthalmic medical costs comprised 17.9% of Study Cohort societal ophthalmic costs, versus 74.1% of Control Cohort societal ophthalmic costs (P < 0.001) and 10.4% of 20/800 to no light perception subcohort costs. Direct nonmedical costs, primarily caregiver, comprised 67.1% of Study Cohort societal ophthalmic costs, versus 21.3% ($1,302/$6,116) of Control Cohort costs (P < 0.001) and 74.1% of 20/800 to no light perception subcohort costs.
Total societal ophthalmic costs associated with neovascular age-related macular degeneration dramatically increase as vision in the better-seeing eye decreases.
To review the contribution of the Nurses' Health Study (NHS) to understanding the genetic and lifestyle factors that influence the risk of cataract, age-related macular degeneration, and glaucoma.
We performed a narrative review of the publications of the NHS between 1976 and 2016.
The NHS has helped to elucidate the roles of genetics, lifestyle factors (e.g., cigarette smoking associated with cataract extraction and age-related macular degeneration), medical conditions (e.g., diabetes associated with cataract extraction and glaucoma), and dietary factors (e.g., greater carotenoid intake and lower glycemic diet associated with lower risk of age-related macular degeneration) in the etiology of degree and progression of lens opacities, cataract extraction, age-related macular degeneration, primary open-angle glaucoma, and exfoliation glaucoma.
The findings from the NHS, combined with those of other studies, have provided compelling evidence to support public health recommendations for helping to prevent age-related eye diseases: abstinence from cigarette smoking, maintenance of healthy weight and diabetes prevention, and a healthy diet rich in fruits and vegetables.
Apoptosis, autophagosomes, and lysosomes are lacking in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) eyes. Necrosis, not apoptosis, appeared to be the prominent type of cell death in RPE, which led to the accumulation of cell debris within and on both sides of Bruch's membrane. The endothelium of the choriocapillaris had an altered planar cell polarity which encompassed the disappearance of fenestrations, the thickening of cytoplasm, and anterior nuclear dislocation. There were no significant differences in RPE and choroidal aberrations between macular and temporal regions. Loss of endothelial polarity could be at the crux of AMD initiation and progression.
Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy has revolutionized the treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration; however, it is important to monitor actual use of ranibizumab and related treatment outcomes in routine practice.
This was a retrospective, observational study to monitor the 2-year outcomes following ranibizumab treatment for wet age-related macular degeneration in Portugal. Patients treated between January 2009 and December 2009 were retrospectively evaluated. All decisions were made by the treating physician in accordance with their usual routine clinical practice. The primary assessment was mean change in visual acuity score using Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study or Snellen equivalent.
A total of 128 patients with wet age-related macular degeneration were analyzed (mean age 79.4 years; mean visual acuity score 54.2 letters). Mean change in visual acuity score from baseline was -1.6 letters (n = 82) at year one and -5.1 letters (n = 72) at year two. The mean number of ranibizumab injections was 3.8 (year one) and 1.6 (year two). On average, patients attended 8.6 and 5.0 visits and optical coherence tomography was used in 75.0% of patients in year one and in 56.3% of patients in year two, respectively.
Despite a relatively high number of visits, including monitoring visits and use of optical coherence tomography - guided therapy, few injections were administered and visual acuity was not improved.
These findings indicate that as-needed treatment resulted in under-dosing in a real-life setting in Portugal. Such limitations may also be related to increasing numbers of patients, resulting in clinic saturation.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of vision loss among the elderly. Atrophic AMD, including early, intermediate and geographic atrophy (GA), accounts for ~90% of all cases. It is a multifactorial degeneration characterized by chronic inflammation, oxidative stress and aging components. Although no FDA-approved treatment yet exists for the late stage of atrophic AMD, multiple pathological mechanisms are partially known and several promising therapies are in various stages of development. Areas covered: Underlying mechanisms that define atrophic AMD will help provide novel therapeutic targets that will address this largely unmet clinical need. The purpose of this paper is to review current promising drugs that are being evaluated in clinical trials. Because no pharmacological treatments are currently available for late stage of atrophic AMD, any new therapy would have extensive market potential. Expert opinion: The number of AMD patients is predicted to increase to ~30 million worldwide by 2020. In response to this enormous unmet clinical need, new promising therapies are being developed and evaluated in clinical trials. We propose that the assessment of novel interventions will also need to consider the genotypes of participants, as the benefit may be determined by polymorphisms in an individual's genetic background.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a major cause of progressive and degenerative visual impairment. Although the exact pathogenic mechanism of AMD is still unknown, clinical observations such as the high accumulation of oxidative products and macrophages in retina suggest the importance of oxidative stress and inflammation in AMD.
Mouse photoreceptor-derived 661 W cells and human ARPE-19 cells were treated with oxidized phospholipids (Ox-PC) or H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> to mimic oxidative damage. The effect of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1) secreted by retina cells on the migration of monocyte macrophage RAW 264.7 cells was determined using transwell chambers and antibody neutralization assay. MCP-1, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) that secreted into supernatant were measured by ELISA and their intracellular expression was detected by qRT-PCR and western blot. Intracellular Ox-PC level was detected by competitive ELISA. The amount of migrated RAW 264.7 cells was counted by flow cytometry.
Oxidative damage by both H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and Ox-PC induced the secretion of MCP-1 in human ARPE-19 and mouse 661 W cells. MCP-1 induced by oxidative damage enhanced the migration ability of macrophage RAW 264.7 cells and the secretion of TNF-α, IL-1β and VEGF, which could be reduced by anti-MCP-1 neutralizing antibodies.
The results indicated that oxidative damage increases intracellular Ox-PC and the secretion of MCP-1 in retina cells. The increased MCP-1 induced by oxidative damage attracts macrophages to retinas, and macrophages release pro-inflammatory factor and promote the process of AMD.
Damage of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells by A2E may be critical for age-related macular degeneration (AMD) management. Accumulation and photooxidation of A2E are known to be one of the critical causes in AMD. Here, we evaluated the protective effect of resveratrol (RES), piceatannol (PIC) and RES glycones on blue-light-induced RPE cell death caused by A2E photooxidation. A2E treatment followed by blue light exposure caused significant damages on human RPE cells (ARPE-19). But the damages were attenuated by post- and pre-treatment of RES and PIC in our in vitro models. The results of cell free system and FAB-MS analysis clearly showed that the reduction of A2E by blue light exposure was significantly rescued, and that oxidized forms of A2E were significantly reduced by RES or PIC treatment. Besides, RES or PIC inhibited the intracellular accumulation of A2E. Not only RES and PIC but RES glycones showed protection of ARPE-19 cells against A2E and blue-light-induced photo-damage. These findings demonstrate that RES and its analogs may have protective effects against A2E and blue-light-induced ARPE-19 cell death through regulation of A2E accumulation as well as photooxidation of A2E. Thus RES and its analogs may be beneficial for AMD treatment.
To compare baseline characteristics, treatment frequency, visual acuity (VA), and morphologic outcomes of eyes with >50% of the lesion composed of blood (B50 group) versus all other eyes (Other group) enrolled in the Comparison of Age-Related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials (CATT).
Prospective cohort study within a multicenter randomized clinical trial.
CATT patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Treatment for the study eye was assigned randomly to either ranibizumab or bevacizumab and to 3 different dosing regimens over a 2-year period. Reading center graders evaluated baseline and follow-up morphology in color fundus photographs, fluorescein angiography (FA), and optical coherence tomography (OCT). Masked examiners tested VA.
Morphologic features and VA at 1 and 2 years.
The B50 group consisted of 84 of 1185 (7.1%) patients enrolled in CATT. Baseline lesion characteristics differed between groups. In the B50 group, choroidal neovascularization size was smaller (0.73 vs 1.83 disc areas [DA]; P < 0.001), total lesion size was greater (4.55 vs 2.31 DA; P <0.001), total retinal thickness was greater (524 vs 455 μm; P = 0.02), and mean VA was worse (56.0 vs 60.9 letters; P = 0.002). Increases in mean VA were similar in the B50 and Other groups at 1 year (+9.3 vs +7.2 letters; P = 0.22) and at 2 years (9.0 vs 6.1 letters; P = 0.17). Eyes treated PRN received a similar number of injections in the 2 groups (12.2 vs 13.4; P = 0.27). Mean lesion size in the B50 group decreased by 1.2 DA at both 1 and 2 years (primarily owing to resolution of hemorrhage) and increased in the Other group by 0.33 DA at 1 year and 0.91 DA at 2 years (P < 0.001). Leakage on FA and fluid on OCT were similar between groups at 1 and 2 years.
In CATT, the B50 group had a visual prognosis similar to the Other group. Lesion size decreased markedly through 2 years. Eyes like those enrolled in CATT with neovascular AMD lesions composed of >50% blood can be managed similarly to those with less or no blood.
We sought to determine if specific genetic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) influence vascular endothelial growth factor inhibition response to ranibizumab in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
A total of 403 Caucasian patients diagnosed with exudative AMD were included. After a three-injection loading phase, a pro re nata regimen was followed. Nine SNPs from six different genes (CFH, CFB, ARMS2, SERPINF1, VEGFR1, VEGF) were genotyped. Non-genetic risk factors (gender, smoking habit and hypertension) were also assessed. Patients were classified as good or poor responders (GR or PR) according to functional (visual acuity), anatomical (foveal thickness measured by OCT) and fluid criteria (fluid/no fluid measured by OCT).
Hypertension was the environmental factor with the strongest poor response association with ranibizumab in the anatomical measure after the loading phase (p = 0.0004; OR 3.7; 95% CI, 2.4-5.8) and after 12 months of treatment (p = 10<sup>-5</sup> ; OR 2.3; 95% CI, 1.5-3.4). The genetic variants rs12614 (CFB), rs699947 (VEGFA) and rs7993418 (VEGFR1) predisposed patients to a good response, while rs12603486 and rs1136287 (SERPINF1) were associated with a poor response. The protective genotype of rs800292 variant (CFH) was also associated with a poor anatomical response (p 0.0048).
All these data suggest that genetics play an important role in treatment response in AMD patients.
To assess the time from symptom onset to treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nvAMD) and to measure the awareness of AMD in Southeast Scotland.
Retrospective cross-sectional study.
Secondary care, Southeast of Scotland.
Patients treated with intravitreal therapy (IVT) for nvAMD in Southeast Scotland between 2013 and 2015 were identified using a treatment register. Notes were retrospectively reviewed. We measured time from: (A) symptom onset to first presentation at primary care, (B) referral to ophthalmic clinic appointment and (C) ophthalmic clinic appointment to first IVT treatment. To investigate AMD awareness, we performed a cluster random sample survey of patients visiting non-AMD ophthalmic clinics using a previously validated 12-item questionnaire.
195 patients (mean age 78 years) were included in the study. The mean delays between the different stages-A, B and C-were 54.2 (95% CI ±13), 28.2 (95% CI ±4.0) and 31.5 (95% CI ±3.6) days, respectively. There was an additional mean delay of 7.5 (95% CI ±1.6) days when patients were indirectly referred by optometrists via general practitioners (P<0.05). 140 patients (mean age 78) participated in the awareness survey; 62.1% reported being 'aware' of AMD but only 37.3% described AMD symptoms correctly.
There was a significant delay at every step of the nvAMD care pathway. The causes for this were multifactorial and included delays in first presentation to a healthcare provider, referral from primary care and initiation of secondary care treatment. Our data are likely to underestimate prehospital delays as a large number of cases are likely to have undefined symptoms and onset. We also identified suboptimal awareness of AMD which could account for a substantial delay in presentation from symptom onset. These findings highlight the need to address AMD awareness and the need for urgent treatment to prevent avoidable vision loss resulting from nvAMD.
To investigate the levels of circulating CD34+ stem cells in patients with neovascular type age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and its relation with clinical and optical coherence tomography (OCT) findings.
The study consisted of 55 patients: 28 patients (18 male and 10 female) with neovascular type AMD as a study group and 27 patients (12 male and 15 female) scheduled for cataract surgery as a control group. The level of CD34+ stem cells was measured by ﬂow cytometry. Demographic and clinical data were recorded.
The mean ages of patients in the study and control groups were 71 ± 8 and 68 ± 6 years, respectively. There was no statistically significant difference in terms of age, sex, or systemic disease association between study and control groups. However, smoking status was significantly higher in the study group (67.9% vs 37.0%; p = 0.02). Stem cell levels were significantly higher in the study group (1.5 ± 0.9 vs 0.5 ± 0.3; p<0.001), but there was no relation between stem cell levels and clinical and OCT findings.
Increased circulating CD34+ stem cell levels were observed in patients with choroidal neovascular membrane associated with AMD, but no significant relation was found between cell levels and clinical and OCT findings.
Mononuclear phagocytes (MPs), including monocytes/macrophages, play complex roles in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) pathogenesis. We reported altered gene-expression signature in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from AMD patients, and a chemokine receptor signature on AMD monocytes. To obtain comprehensive understanding of MP involvement, particularly in peripheral circulation in AMD, we performed global gene expression analysis in monocytes. We separated monocytes from treatment-naïve neovascular AMD (nvAMD) patients (n = 14) and age-matched controls (n = 15), and performed microarray and bioinformatics analysis. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed on other sets of nvAMD (n = 25), atrophic AMD (n = 21), and controls (n = 28) for validation. This validated microarray genes (like TMEM176A/B and FOSB) tested, including differences between nvAMD and atrophic AMD. We identified 2,165 differentially-expressed genes (P < 0.05), including 79 genes with log2 fold change ≥1.5 between nvAMD and controls. Functional annotation using DAVID and TANGO demonstrated immune response alterations in AMD monocytes (FDR-P <0.05), validated by randomized data comparison (P < 0.0001). GSEA, ISMARA, and MEME analysis found immune enrichment and specific involved microRNAs. Enrichment of differentially-expressed genes in monocytes was found in retina via SAGE data-mining. These genes were enriched in non-classical vs. classical monocyte subsets (P < 0.05). Therefore, global gene expression analysis in AMD monocytes reveals an altered immune-related signature, further implicating systemic MP activation in AMD.
Microperimetry is a novel technique for assessing visual function that appears particularly suitable for age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Compared with standard automated perimetry, microperimetry offers several unique features. It simultaneously images the fundus, incorporates an eye-tracking system to correct the stimulus location for fixation loss, and identifies any preferred retinal loci. We identified 52 articles that met the inclusion criteria for a systematic review of microperimetry in the assessment of visual function in AMD. We discuss microperimetry and AMD in relation to disease severity, structural imaging outcomes, other measures of visual function, and evaluation of the efficacy of surgical and/or medical therapies in clinical trials. The evidence for the use of microperimetry in the functional assessment of AMD is encouraging. Disruptions of the ellipsoid zone band and retinal pigment epithelium are clearly associated with reduced differential light sensitivity despite the maintenance of good visual acuity. Reduced differential light sensitivity is also associated with outer segment thinning and retinal pigment epithelium thickening in early AMD and with both a thickening and a thinning of the whole retina in choroidal neovascularization. Microperimetry, however, lacks the robust diffuse and focal loss age-corrected probability analyses associated with standard automated perimetry, and the technique is currently limited by this omission.
The association between fish consumption and risk of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is still unclear. The aim of the current meta-analysis and systematic review was to quantitatively evaluate findings from observational studies on fish consumption and the risk of AMD. Relevant studies were identified by searching electronic databases (Medline and EMBASE) and reviewing the reference lists of relevant articles up to August, 2016. Prospective cohort studies that reported relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the link between fish consumption and risk of AMD were included. A total of 4202 cases with 128,988 individuals from eight cohort studies were identified in the current meta-analysis. The meta-analyzed RR was 0.76 (95% CI, 0.65-0.90) when any AMD was considered. Subgroup analyses by AMD stages showed that fish consumption would reduce the risk of both early (RR, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.72-0.96) and late (RR; 0.76; 95% CI, 0.60-0.97) AMD. When stratified by the follow-up duration, fish consumption was a protective factor of AMD in both over 10 years (<i>n</i> = 5; RR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.67-0.97) and less than 10 years (<i>n</i> = 3; RR, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.51 to 0.97) follow-up duration. Stratified analyses by fish type demonstrated that dark meat fish (RR, 0.68, 95% CI, 0.46-0.99), especially tuna fish (RR, 0.58; 95% CI, 95% CI, 0.47-0.71) intake was associated with reduced AMD risk. Evidence of a linear association between dose of fish consumption and risk of AMD was demonstrated. The results of this meta-analysis demonstrated that fish consumption can reduce AMD risk. Advanced, well-designed, randomized clinical trials are required in order to validate the conclusions in this study.
To study the clinical outcomes of pigment epithelial detachment (PED) associated with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) in patients switched from Ranibizumab to Aflibercept.
Retrospective non-comparative case series. 50 eyes with active nAMD and fovea involving PED of ≥100 μm measured manually using the caliper on the OCT, initially treated with intravitreal Ranibizumab (0.5 mg/0.05 ml) and later switched to Aflibercept (2.0 mg/0.05 ml). The outcome measures of best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), PED height, PED width and number of injections were measured at baseline and at time point of switch, 4 months, 1 year and at last follow up visit post-switch. Three paired t-tests and Pearson's correlations were calculated to analyze variables at switch and change in variables at 1 year.
After switch to Aflibercept, the improvement of BCVA was 1.84 (p = 0.11), 1.74 (p = 0.21) and 1.16 (p = 0.45) letters, the change in PED height was - 65.6μm (p < 0.001), - 50.64μm (p = 0.007) and - 68.48μm (p < 0.001) and the change in PED width was - 36.6μm (p = 0.514), + 29.7μm (p = 0.922) and + 118.4μm (p = 0.210) at 4 months, 1 year and the last visit respectively. There was a moderate negative correlation between reduction in PED height at 1 year after switch and PED height at the time of switch to Aflibercept (r = - 0.474, p < 0.05).
The improvement in BCVA and change in PED width was not statistically significant however the reduction in PED height was significant after switching treatment to Aflibercept. The change in BCVA at 1 year after switch was not correlated with any of the analyzed anatomical characteristics of PED.
To assess the impact of unstudied societal factors for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) on functional outcomes after anti-VEGFs.
Charts of 94 nAMD patients treated in the Monticelli-Paradis Centre, Marseille, France, were reviewed. Phone interviews were conducted to assess societal factors, including transportation, living status, daily reading and social security scheme (SSS). Primary outcome was the impact of family support and disease burden on functional improvement in nAMD.
Between baseline and month 24 (M24), 42.4% of the variability in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was explained by the cumulative effect of the following societal factors: intermittent out-patient follow-up, marital status, daily reading, transportation type, commuting time. No isolated societal factor significantly correlated with ETDRS BCVA severity at M24. A trend to correlation was observed between the EDTRS score at M24 and the SSS (P = 0.076), economic burden (P = 0.075), time between diagnosis and treatment initiation (P = 0.070). A significant correlation was found for the disease burdensome on the patient (P = 0.034) and low vision rehabilitation (P = 0.014).
Societal factors could influence functional outcomes in nAMD patients treated with anti-VEGFs. They could contribute to the healing process or sustain disease progression.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are key regulators of gene expression in humans. Overexpression or depletion of individual miRNAs is associated with human disease. Current knowledge suggests that the retina is influenced by miRNAs and that dysregulation of miRNAs as well as alterations in components of the miRNA biogenesis machinery are involved in retinal diseases, including age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Furthermore, recent studies have indicated that the vitreous has a specific panel of circulating miRNAs and that this panel varies according to the specific pathological stress experienced by the retinal cells. MicroRNA (miRNA) profiling indicates subtype-specific miRNA profiles for late-stage AMD highlighting the importance of proper miRNA regulation in AMD. This review will describe the function of important miRNAs involved in inflammation, oxidative stress and pathological neovascularization, the key molecular mechanisms leading to AMD, and focus on dysregulated miRNAs as potential therapeutic targets in AMD.
Treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) remains a major challenge in ophthalmology. It is essential to determine which of VEGF inhibition non-responders can benefit from photodynamic therapy (PDT). As AMD is strongly related to gene polymorphisms, genetic factors can modify efficacy of treatment. Swept-source optical coherence tomography (SS-OCT) gives exceptional insight into the retina and choroid. SS-OCT usefulness needs to be evaluated in nAMD patients.
Prospective 6-month study included consecutive 110 patients (110 eyes) with predominantly classic neovascular AMD treated with photodynamic therapy. Only non-responders to anti-VEGF were included in the study. Greatest linear dimension (GLD) of the lesion, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central subfield macular thickness (CSMT) and central choroidal thickness were assessed and compared between CFH and ARMS2 genotype groups. Success rate was the main endpoint. It was defined as not active CNV in the center of the fovea and no worsening in BCVA. Multiple regression was used to assess gene polymorphisms influence on PDT results. Wilcoxon tests were performed to determine significance of changes from baseline values.
Following genotype frequencies were obtained-CFH CC 35 patients (31.8%), CT 52 (47.3%), TT 23 (20.9%); ARMS2 TT 28 patients (25.4%), GT 43 (39.1%), GG 39 (35.4%) success rate in CC/CT/TT CFH and TT/GT/GG ARMS2 groups were as follows respectively: 22.9%, 28.8%, 30.4% and 28.6%, 25.6%, 28.2%. The differences were not significant with highest odds ratio TT vs. CC CFH 1.57 (95% CI 0.48-5.2, p=0.4). Significant increase in GLD was observed only in CC CFH group. Overall mean following measured parameters were obtained at baseline/day 7/month 3/month 6 (significant changes from baseline are marked with asterisk): GLD-3825±1301μm/3901±1579μm/3861±1463μm/3925±1523μm; CSMT-405±203μm/434±257μm*/321±163μm*/295±157*μm; CCT-235±103μm/278±157*μm/211±113μm*/201±107*μm; BCVA-49.3±12.5/43.2±14.2*/49.6±11.6/48.7±12.2 letters on ETDRS charts. In all patients classic component of the lesion was assessed with SS-OCT with no need to be reaffirmed in FA. Thus FA was used mainly for lesion size calculation.
Common genetic factors seem not to influence PDT effectiveness in VEGF inhibitors non-responders. SS-OCT is a valuable tool of nAMD monitoring, especially for choroid assessment. Deterioration of retinal structure and function is observed one week after PDT. It is related to increase in both retinal and choroidal thickness and is accompanied by mild temporary BCVA decrease.
We report on a novel autoantigen expressed in human macular tissues, identified following an initial Western blot (WB)-based screening of sera from subjects with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) for circulating auto-antibodies (AAbs) recognizing macular antigens. Immunoprecipitation, 2D-gel electrophoresis (2D-GE) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), direct enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), WBs, immunohistochemistry (IHC), human primary and ARPE-19 immortalized cell cultures were used to characterize this novel antigen. An approximately 40-kDa autoantigen in AMD was identified as the scavenger receptor CD5 antigen-like protein (CD5L), also known as apoptosis inhibitor of macrophage (AIM). CD5L/AIM was localized to human RPE by IHC and WB methods and to retinal microglial cells by IHC. ELISAs with recombinant CD5L/AIM on a subset of AMD sera showed a nearly 2-fold higher anti-CD5L/AIM reactivity in AMD vs. Control sera (p = 0.000007). Reactivity ≥0.4 was associated with 18-fold higher odds of having AMD (χ<sup>2</sup> = 21.42, p = 0.00063). Circulating CD5L/AIM levels were also nearly 2-fold higher in AMD sera compared to controls (p = 0.0052). The discovery of CD5L/AIM expression in the RPE and in retinal microglial cells adds to the known immunomodulatory roles of these cells in the retina. The discovery of AAbs recognizing CD5L/AIM identifies a possible novel disease biomarker and suggest a potential role for CD5L/AIM in the pathogenesis of AMD in situ. The possible mechanisms via which anti-CD5L/AIM AAbs may contribute to AMD pathogenesis are discussed. In particular, since CD5L is known to stimulate autophagy and to participate in oxidized LDL uptake in macrophages, we propose that anti-CD5L/AIM auto-antibodies may play a role in drusen biogenesis and inflammatory RPE damage in AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the main cause of visual impairment and legal blindness in older individuals. COL8A1 rs13095226 variants have recently been implicated associated with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) and Polypoidal Choroidal Vasculopathy (PCV) in American studies. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between the COL8A1 rs13095226 Polymorphism and neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) in Chinese people.
900 Chinese subjects-300 cases with nAMD, 300 cases with PCV and 300 controls, were enrolled in a cross-sectional observational study. The diagnoses of nAMD and PCV were confirmed by Fundus photography, Fluorescence Fundus Angiography (FFA) and Indocyanine Green Angiography (ICGA). Genomic DNA was extracted from venous blood leukocytes and genotypes of rs13095226 were determined by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Differences in allele distribution between cases and controls were tested by chi-square tests, with age and gender adjusted by logistic regression analysis.
The COL8A1 rs13095226 polymorphism was not statistically significantly different from the nAMD or PCV to the normal controls (P>0.05) in Chinese Population. The association remained insignificant after adjustment for age and gender differences (P>0.05).
This case-control study indicated that the COL8A1 rs13095226 polymorphism is not associated with nAMD or PCV, which suggesting this gene maybe not a susceptibility gene locus for nAMD or PCV in Chinese subjects.
The purpose of this study was to investigate peripapillary and macular choroidal thickness (CT) in patients with early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) with or without reticular pseudodrusen (RPD).
We investigated the medical records of 89 patients (89 eyes) with early AMD. The eyes were grouped into three categories according to the extent of RPD: no RPD, localized RPD, and diffuse RPD. Peripapillary and macular CT were measured with images obtained by spectral domain optical coherence tomography. CT in the peripapillary and macular areas was compared among groups.
Both RPD groups exhibited an older subject age and a greater female predominance compared to the non-RPD group (P = 0.007 and P = 0.030, respectively). Macular and peripapillary CT were different among the three groups (all, P < 0.001), and both RPD groups showed a thinner choroid in all areas compared to the non-RPD group after adjusting for age and sex (all, P ≤ 0.016). Temporal peripapillary and nasal macular CT at 500 μm and 1500 μm, respectively, from the fovea in eyes with diffuse RPD were significantly thinner than that in eyes with localized RPD (P = 0.008, P = 0.016 and P < 0.001, respectively).
In addition to the macular area, the peripapillary CT, including the area outside the macula, was thinner in eyes with RPD than in those without RPD. Significant differences in the papillomacular choroid were observed based on RPD distribution type, which suggests that variation in CT is based on the extent of RPD.
To examine the association between xanthophyll intake and prevalent early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) using data from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study (n = 10,295). Potential effect modification by genetic polymorphisms and biomarkers of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) metabolism was explored.
Xanthophyll intake was assessed at visit 1 (1987-1989) using food frequency questionnaires. Prevalent early AMD was assessed at visit 3 (1993-1995) via retinal photographs. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for AMD by quintiles of xanthophyll intake, adjusted for age, sex, race, field center, and pack-years of smoking. To evaluate effect modification, the association between tertiles (T) of xanthophyll intake and AMD was stratified by complement factor H (CFH) rs1061170 and age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 (ARMS2) rs10490924 genotypes, as well as by median cutpoints of HDL biomarkers.
Xanthophyll intake was not associated with AMD in the overall sample, Caucasians (n = 8257), or African-Americans (n = 2038). Exploratory analyses observed that the association between xanthophyll intake and AMD varied statistically significantly by CFH rs1061170 genotype among Caucasians (p for interaction = 0.045) but not African Americans. No interactions were observed between xanthophyll intake and ARMS2 rs10490924. Moreover, higher xanthophyll intake was associated with decreased odds of AMD among participants with lower HDL (OR = 0.79, 95% CI 0.57-1.09) but not higher HDL (p for interaction = 0.048).
Xanthophyll intake was not associated with early AMD. Further studies to investigate this association by genetic susceptibility or variations in HDL metabolism are needed.
To assess changes in vision-related quality of life (VR-QoL) among patients with treatment-resistant neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) following intravitreal aflibercept treatment over 48 weeks.
We conducted a prospective study in which 49 patients with nAMD resistant to anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy were switched to intravitreal aflibercept. Patients were treated with three loading doses every 4 weeks followed by injections every 8 weeks, for a total of 48 weeks. Ophthalmic examinations performed at each visit included best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and central macular thickness (CMT) measurement. The National Eye Institute Visual Functioning Questionnaire 25 (NEI VFQ-25) was used to assess VR-QoL at baseline and weeks 24 and 48. Changes in NEI VFQ-25 composite and subscale scores were analyzed using paired t tests. The relationship between the change in VR-QoL and changes in BCVA and CMT, and the impact of the better-seeing eye (BSE, defined as the eye reading the greater number of letters at baseline) vs. the worse-seeing eye (WSE, the fellow eye to the BSE) were assessed.
Mean NEI VFQ-25 composite scores improved significantly at weeks 24 and 48 compared to baseline (4.5 ± 9.2 and 4.4 ± 11.8, respectively, all p < 0.01). Among subscales, general vision and near and distance activities showed significant improvements at weeks 24 and 48 (all p < 0.05). Improvement in the NEI VFQ-25 composite score was significantly associated with increased BCVA at week 48 (β coefficient = 0.43, p = 0.029), but not with change in CMT (β coefficient = -0.007, p = 0.631). There was no association between VR-QoL changes and BSE or WSE.
Despite previous anti-VEGF treatment in this cohort, overall VR-QoL improved following aflibercept therapy over 48 weeks. This improvement was related to improved vision in treatment eyes regardless of whether they were the BSE or WSE.
To analyze and compare the effects of three common treatment modalities for a thick subfoveal hemorrhage due to exudative age-related macular degeneration on final visual acuity and the size of the final subretinal scar.
Retrospective case series.
Single-site, tertiary referral center.
Thirty-nine patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration and acute SMH greater than 250 μm.
Patients received vitrectomy with a subretinal tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) injection, pneumatic displacement (PD) with intravitreal tPA, or PD without tPA within 2 weeks of presentation.
Functional outcome was determined by Snellen visual acuity. Anatomical outcome was determined as the final disciform scar size.
Treatment groups did not differ in age, sex, initial visual acuity, the initial area of the thick subfoveal hemorrhage, follow-up duration, lens status, duration of exudative age-related macular degeneration, previous intravitreal bevacizumab injections, or time from last given injection to the acute thick subfoveal hemorrhage. Final visual acuity improved significantly in both the vitrectomy and subretinal tPA injection group (P < 0.001), and the intravitreal tPA injection group (P = 0.002) but not with PD alone. Patients treated with subretinal tPA achieved 40% ± 54% reduction in final scar area, in contrast to 27% ± 35% decrease in patients treated with intravitreal tPA (P = 0.001).
Treatment with tPA improves the functional and anatomical outcomes in patients with thick subfoveal hemorrhage due to subfoveal choroidal neovascular membrane secondary to exudative age-related macular degeneration and was superior to PD without tPA. Vitrectomy with subretinal tPA injection reduced the final disciform scar compared with PD with or without intravitreal tPA.
To compare 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD) levels in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (NVAMD) with patients with nonneovascular age-related macular degeneration and control patients.
Medical records of all patients diagnosed with age-related macular degeneration and tested for serum 25OHD level at a single medical center were reviewed. Control patients were selected from patients diagnosed with pseudophakia but without age-related macular degeneration. The lowest 25OHD level available for each patient was recorded.
Two hundred sixteen patients with nonneovascular age-related macular degeneration, 146 with NVAMD, and 100 non-age-related macular degeneration control patients were included. The levels of 25OHD (mean ± SD) were significantly lower in NVAMD patients (26.1 ± 14.4 ng/mL) versus nonneovascular age-related macular degeneration (31.5 ± 18.2 ng/mL, P = 0.003) and control (29.4 ± 10.1 ng/mL, P = 0.049) patients. The prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency (<30 ng/mL 25OHD), deficiency (<20 ng/mL), and severe deficiency (<10 ng/mL) were highest in the NVAMD group. The highest quintile of 25OHD was associated with a 0.35 (95% confidence interval, 0.18-0.68) odds ratio for NVAMD.
This is the largest study to compare 25OHD levels in patients with the different clinical forms of age-related macular degeneration. Mean 25OHD levels were lower and vitamin D deficiency was more prevalent in NVAMD patients. These associations suggest that further research is necessary regarding vitamin D deficiency as a potentially modifiable risk factor for the development of NVAMD.
Evaluation of the impact of different macular optical coherence parameters on visual acuity as early as 1 day after injection of ranibizumab in patients with subfoveal exsudative age-related macular degeneration.
This was an interventional, non randomized, open label prospective study, where we evaluated 20 eyes of 20 patients affected by exudative age-related macular degeneration. These patients were treated with injections of ranibizumab between February 2013 and January 2015. The primary endpoint of this study was to evaluate the early changes in optical coherence tomography parameters (retinal thickness, central and total retinal volume) and impact on best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) obtained by logarithm of minimum resolution using ETDRS protocol in patients treated with a single dose intravitreal injection of ranibizumab (0.5 mg/0.05 mL) during the first month of follow. The patients were evaluated on the first day, them at 7 and 30 days after the treatment. The National Eye Institute Visual Functioning Questionnaire was applied during the study period to assess early perception of ranibizumab injection effectiveness. The adverse events were monitored throughout the study.
Central retinal thickness values at 1 (464.0 ± 97.8 µm), 7 (379.9 ± 107.8 µm) and 30 days (365.5 ± 95.1 µm) after ranibizumab injection showed a statically significant reduction when compared with baseline results (<i>P</i> = 0.01, <i>P</i> = 0.001, <i>P</i> = 0.001, respectively). Similar alterations were observed in central and total retinal volume, which were detected early on the first day of evaluation, after the measurement at baseline (central: 0.36 ± 0.07 vs. 0.40 ± 0.10 mm<sup>3</sup>, <i>P</i> = 0.01; total: 9.62 ± 1.10 vs. 9.99 ± 2.56 mm<sup>3</sup>, <i>P</i> = 0.002) and remained steady at 7 (<i>P</i> = 0.001, <i>P</i> = 0.002, respectively) and 30 days (<i>P</i> = 0.001, <i>P</i> = 0.004, respectively) with slight variations without losing their gains in these parameters. The best-corrected logarithm of minimum angle of resolution (logMAR) showed a statistically significant difference when compared to the baseline. (0.81 ± 0.16 vs. 0.67 ± 0.24, <i>P</i> = 0.005). The NEI-VFQ-25 questionnaire demonstrate statically significant results after treatment. When patients were asked about the subjective improvement in visual quality, over 80% reported early improvement. Throughout the period of follow-up visits, no serious adverse events were reported.
Intravitreal injection of ranibizumab can produce early changes in optical coherence tomography parameters and an improvement in perceived visual quality of patients with subfoveal exsudative age-related macular degeneration.
To evaluate the quality of online information on age-related macular degeneration available in Portuguese.
The search term "age-related macular degeneration" was used to browse the web using four different search engines. The first 40 websites appearing on match lists provided by each search engine were recorded and those listed in at least three tab pages selected. The Sandvik Severity Index was used as to assess website quality.
Quality of information available on selected websites was rated average (mean Sandvik Score 7.08±2.23).
Most websites disseminating information about age-related macular degeneration were of average quality. The need to readjust web-based information to target lay public and promote increased understanding was emphasized.
To present Swedish Macula Register (SMR) data regarding treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in clinical practice since 2008.
A retrospective register-based study was conducted. Evaluation of baseline demographics, visual outcome and number of injections during this period is presented.
Mean age at diagnosis was 79 ± (SD) 8 years; 65% were female. The proportion of patients with <2 months' duration of symptoms increased from 26% in 2008 to 41% in 2014 (p = 0.001). Mean visual acuity (VA) at baseline increased from 54.3 ± 15.0 early treatment diabetic retinopathy study (ETDRS) letters in 2008 to 57.8 ± 15.6 letters in 2014 (CI<sub>95</sub> 2.6; 4.3; p < 0.001). Mean VA after 1 year of treatment increased from 57.8 ± 17.7 ETDRS letters for patients who started the treatment in 2008 to 62.8 ± 16.4 ETDRS letters in patients starting treatment in 2014 (CI<sub>95</sub> 2.67; 4.64; p < 0.001). During all study years, the proportion of patients with an improvement in VA of between 5 and 15 letters was around 30%, while 14% had VA improvement of more than 15 letters. The mean number of injections during the first treatment year increased from 4.3 ± 1.9 in 2008 to 5.9 ± 2.9 in 2014 (CI<sub>95</sub> 1.40; 1.67; p < 0.001). Seven-year follow-up of 322 eyes showed a mean change of -1 letters from baseline, with a mean of 21 injections for the entire period.
The duration of symptoms before treatment decreased, while VA at baseline and after 1 year of treatment increased over the years and so did the number of injections. Long-term follow-up demonstrated stable VA.
To compare baseline characteristics, visual acuity (VA), and morphologic outcomes between eyes with retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) and all other eyes among patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (NVAMD) treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) drugs.
Prospective cohort study within the Comparison of Age-Related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials (CATT).
Patients with NVAMD.
Reading center staff evaluated digital color fundus photographs, fluorescein angiography (FA) images, and optical coherence tomography (OCT) scans of eyes with NVAMD treated with either ranibizumab or bevacizumab over a 2-year period. Retinal angiomatous proliferation was identified by the intense intra-retinal leakage of fluorescein in combination with other associated features.
Visual acuity; fluorescein leakage; scar; geographic atrophy (GA) on FA; retinal thickness, fluid, and subretinal hyperreflective material (SHRM) on OCT; and the number of intravitreal anti-VEGF injections at 1 and 2 years.
Retinal angiomatous proliferation was present in 126 of 1183 (10.7%) study eyes at baseline. Mean VA improvement from baseline was greater (10.6 vs. 6.9 letters; P = 0.01) at 1 year, but similar at 2 years (7.8 vs. 6.2 letters; P = 0.34). At 1 year, eyes with RAP were more likely to have no fluid (46% vs. 26%; P < 0.001) on OCT, no leakage on FA (61% vs. 50%; P = 0.03), and greater reduction in foveal thickness (-240 μm vs. -161 μm; P < 0.001). They were more likely to demonstrate GA (24% vs. 15%; P = 0.01) and less likely to have scarring (17% vs. 36%; P < 0.001) or SHRM (36% vs. 48%; P = 0.01). These results were similar at 2 years. The mean change in lesion size at 1 year differed (-0.27 DA vs. 0.27 DA; P = 0.02), but was similar at 2 years (0.49 DA vs. 0.79 DA; P = 0.26). Among eyes treated PRN, eyes with RAP received a lower mean number of injections in year 1 (6.1 vs. 7.4; P = 0.003) and year 2 (5.4 vs. 6.6; P = 0.025).
At both 1 and 2 years after initiation of anti-VEGF treatment in CATT, eyes with RAP were less likely to have fluid, FA leakage, scar, and SHRM and more likely to have GA than eyes without RAP. Mean improvement in VA was similar at 2 years.
To investigate the influence of the vitreoretinal interface on the outcomes of different ranibizumab regimens for exudative age-related macular degeneration.
We conducted a retrospective subanalysis of 2 prospective clinical trials. Patients were treated with ranibizumab for 12 months according to 3 different regimens: pro-re-nata (PRN), treat and extend (T&amp;E), and monthly. Vitreoretinal interface was assessed for absence (group ON) or presence (group OFF) of posterior vitreous detachment (PVD).
We included 64 eyes from 64 patients. Visual improvement was poorer for group ON (0.3 ± 10.7 letters) than for group OFF (9.2 ± 13.3; p = 0.007). A significant difference in letters of improvement between groups was observed in the PRN cohort (ON: -5.0 ± 12.9; OFF: 11.4 ± 11.9; p = 0.003), but not in the cohorts with monthly (ON: 5.7 ± 7.8; OFF: 7.9 ± 15.2; p = 0.735) or T&amp;E (ON: 4.3 ± 4.3; OFF: 7.8 ± 11.1; p = 0.424) treatment.
The negative impact of absence of PVD is regimen dependent, with monthly dosing providing similar outcomes to PVD patients. In the absence of PVD (group ON), PRN should be avoided, and T&amp;E might be an alternative.
To evaluate the development of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) in the fellow eye in patients with unilateral nAMD treated by a treat-and-extend (TAE) regimen with intravitreal aflibercept injections.
We retrospectively studied 104 patients with treatment-naïve unilateral nAMD. We assessed best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and exudative changes in the treated eyes and development of nAMD in the fellow eye for 2 years.
The subjects included 46 patients with typical AMD (tAMD), 44 with polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV), and 14 with retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP). BCVA was significantly improved after the loading phase in all subtypes. Forty-six patients (44.2%) had no recurrence within 2 years after the loading phase, including 12 (26.1%) with tAMD, 23 (52.2%) with PCV, and 11 (78.6%) with RAP (p < 0.01). Eleven patients (10.6%) developed nAMD in the fellow eye within 2 years, including 4 (8.7%) with tAMD, 0 (0%) with PCV, and 7 (50.0%) with RAP (p < 0.001).
Patients with RAP had significantly more frequent development of nAMD in the fellow eye compared to other subtypes, while they showed significantly less recurrence during the TAE regimen with intravitreal aflibercept injections. Development of nAMD in the fellow eye should be monitored in RAP when the injection interval is extended.
To assess the psychometric properties of the Greek Macular Disease Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire (MacTSQ) and evaluate the factors that influence treatment satisfaction of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
The MacTSQ was translated into Greek and administered to 176 patients. All patients completed the SF-12 Health Survey and the Macular disease Dependent Quality of Life Questionnaire (MacDQoL) and underwent vision measurements. For test-retest reliability, a subset of 19 participants completed the MacTSQ twice, two weeks apart. Stepwise multiple linear regression analyses were performed to identify predictors of treatment satisfaction. Change in MacTSQ scores over time was assessed on 83 patients who completed the MacTSQ at a follow-up visit, one year later.
The intraclass correlation coefficients between the first and second test-retest administration ranged from 0.88 to 0.98 for the items and total score. Internal reliability of the total score was adequate (Cronbach's a = 0.837). Principal component analysis revealed three subscales (effectiveness, information provision and convenience, impact). The MacTSQ score showed significant correlations with SF-12 summary scales and MacDQoL scores (ρ = 0.16-0.27). The most important factor that determined the satisfaction was mental health. Distance visual acuity (VA) in better eye was the best predictor of the effectiveness subscale, and the total number of injections was a negative predictor for the convenience subscale. Treatment satisfaction increased at one-year follow-up, despite the deterioration in distance VA.
The Greek MacTSQ is a reliable and valid instrument for assessing nAMD patients' perceptions of treatment satisfaction, especially using its three new subscales. Treatment satisfaction is multifactorial and was primarily determined by patients' mental health status.
To examine the association between subretinal drusenoid deposits (SDDs) identified by multimodal retinal imaging and visual function in older eyes with normal macular health or in the earliest phases of age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Age-related macular degeneration status for each eye was defined according to the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) 9-step classification system (normal = Step 1, early AMD = Steps 2-4) based on color fundus photographs. Visual functions measured were best-corrected photopic visual acuity, contrast and light sensitivity, mesopic visual acuity, low-luminance deficit, and rod-mediated dark adaptation. Subretinal drusenoid deposits were identified through multimodal imaging (color fundus photographs, infrared reflectance and fundus autofluorescence images, and spectral domain optical coherence tomography).
The sample included 1,202 eyes (958 eyes with normal health and 244 eyes with early AMD). In normal eyes, SDDs were not associated with any visual function evaluated. In eyes with early AMD, dark adaptation was markedly delayed in eyes with SDDs versus no SDD (a 4-minute delay on average), P = 0.0213. However, this association diminished after age adjustment, P = 0.2645. Other visual functions in early AMD eyes were not associated with SDDs.
In a study specifically focused on eyes in normal macular health and in the earliest phases of AMD, early AMD eyes with SDDs have slower dark adaptation, largely attributable to the older ages of eyes with SDD; they did not exhibit deficits in other visual functions. Subretinal drusenoid deposits in older eyes in normal macular health are not associated with any visual functions evaluated.
Age-related macular degeneration(AMD) is one of the main leading causes of irreversible vision damage in patients over 50 years old. Genetic factors play an important role in the occurrence and development of AMD. Since the significant correlation between complement factor H (CFH) gene and AMD was found, the pharmacogenomics of CFH polymorphism was paid close attention by academic circles. Among which, studies concerning CFH Y402H were more deeply. Studies have found CFH Y402H genotypes might lead to differences toward the outcome of PDT and anti-VEGF treatment. In this article, we review the researches on the pharmacogenomics of CFH Y402H in wet AMD treatment. <i>(Chin J Ophthalmol, 2017, 53: 144-147)</i>.
To evaluate baseline and treatment factors influencing the response of pigment epithelial detachment (PED) in patients with treatment-naive neovascular age-related macular degeneration after 1 year of intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment.
This retrospective consecutive case series study included 104 eyes (94 patients) with treatment-naive neovascular age-related macular degeneration and associated PED >150 μm treated with aflibercept (n = 41) or ranibizumab (n = 63) for at least 1 year. Stepwise linear regression was used to assess factors influencing best-corrected visual acuity and PED response.
At 1 year, the best-corrected visual acuity improved from 20/63 (60.8 ± 15.9 Early Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy Study letters) at baseline to 20/40 (69.0 ± 15.0 letters) (P = 0.001), and PED maximal height decreased from 370.8 ± 205.6 μm to 238.8 ± 178.5 μm (P = 0.001). Multivariate analysis revealed an association of the visual improvement with lower best-corrected visual acuity at baseline (P = 0.001), the presence of foveal subretinal fluid (P = 0.001), and female gender (P = 0.047). Pigment epithelial detachment height reduction was dependent on higher baseline PED height (P = 0.001) and treatment drug (P = 0.008).
Visual improvement in neovascular age-related macular degeneration with PED was equally achieved with ranibizumab and aflibercept, influenced mainly by baseline best-corrected visual acuity and foveal subretinal fluid. Pigment epithelial detachment height reduction was influenced by baseline height and the treatment drug, favoring aflibercept for a stronger effect. The clinical significance of this result warrants further studies.
We present the results of a Phase 2a randomized controlled trial investigating the safety, and secondary endpoints of subretinal rAAV.sFLT-1 gene therapy in patients with active wet age-related macular degeneration (wAMD).
All patients (n=32), (ClinicalTrials.gov; NCT01494805), received ranibizumab injections at baseline and week 4, and thereafter according to prespecified criteria. Patients in the gene therapy group (n=21) received rAAV.sFLT-1 (1×10<sup>11</sup>vg). All patients were assessed every 4weeks to the week 52 primary endpoint.
Ocular adverse events (AEs) in the rAAV.sFLT-1 group were mainly procedure related and self-resolved. All 11 phakic patients in the rAAV.sFLT-1 group showed progression of cataract following vitrectomy. No systemic safety signals were observed and none of the serious AEs were associated with rAAV.sFLT-1. AAV2 capsid was not detected and rAAV.sFLT-1 DNA was detected transiently in the tears of 13 patients. ELISPOT analysis did not identify any notable changes in T-cell response. In the rAAV.sFLT-1 group 12 patients had neutralizing antibodies (nAb) to AAV2. There was no change in sFLT-1 levels in bodily fluids. In the rAAV.sFLT-1 group, Best Corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA) improved by a median of 1.0 (IQR: -3.0 to 9.0) Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) letters from baseline compared to a median of -5.0 (IQR: -17.5 to 1.0) ETDRS letters change in the control group. Twelve (57%) patients in the rAAV.sFLT-1 group maintained or improved vision compared to 4 (36%) in the control group. The median number of ranibizumab retreatments was 2.0 (IQR: 1.0 to 6.0) for the gene therapy group compared to 4.0 (IQR: 3.5 to 4.0) for the control group. Interpretation rAAV.sFLT-1 combined with the option for co-treatment appears to be a safe and promising approach to the treatment of wAMD.
National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (AP1010405), Lions Eye Institute, Perth Australia, Avalanche Biotechnologies, Menlo Pk, CA, USA.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of blindness among older adults. It has been suggested that mitochondrial defects in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) underlies AMD pathology. To test this idea, we developed primary cultures of RPE to ask whether RPE from donors with AMD differ in their metabolic profile compared with healthy age-matched donors. Analysis of gene expression, protein content, and RPE function showed that these cultured cells replicated many of the cardinal features of RPE in vivo. Using the Seahorse Extracellular Flux Analyzer to measure bioenergetics, we observed RPE from donors with AMD exhibited reduced mitochondrial and glycolytic function compared with healthy donors. RPE from AMD donors were also more resistant to oxidative inactivation of these two energy-producing pathways and were less susceptible to oxidation-induced cell death compared with cells from healthy donors. Investigation of the potential mechanism responsible for differences in bioenergetics and resistance to oxidative stress showed RPE from AMD donors had increased PGC1α protein as well as differential expression of multiple genes in response to an oxidative challenge. Based on our data, we propose that cultured RPE from donors phenotyped for the presence or absence of AMD provides an excellent model system for studying "AMD in a dish". Our results are consistent with the ideas that (i) a bioenergetics crisis in the RPE contributes to AMD pathology, and (ii) the diseased environment in vivo causes changes in the cellular profile that are retained in vitro.
This study was conducted to investigate the depressive symptoms and quality of life (QOL) in patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) using data obtained from the Korea National Health and Nutritional Examination Survey V-2 (KNHANES V-2) conducted in 2011.
This was a population-based, cross-sectional study that selected 329 participants from the fifth KNHANES (2011) who were diagnosed with AMD by an ophthalmologist based on fundus photography. The prevalence of depressive symptoms and the health-related QOL (using EuroQol indices) in this cohort were also estimated. Factors associated with depressive symptoms, including socioeconomic status, QOL indices, and associated chronic diseases, were investigated using multivariate regression models.
Depressive symptoms were observed more frequently in AMD patients than in non-AMD controls (p = 0.013). Among the total 329 AMD participants, 65 (19.8%) had depressive symptoms. There were 16 males (24.6%) and 49 females (75.4%). Upon multivariate analysis, significant factors found to be associated with depressive symptoms were female gender (odds ratio [OR], 2.082; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.001 to 4.330), being in the "dependent" group for activities of daily living (OR, 4.638; 95% CI, 2.061 to 10.435), and having "some problems" in the "anxiety-depression" dimension of the EQ-5D (OR, 7.704; 95% CI, 1.890 to 31.408).
Female gender and being dependent on others for activities of daily living increased the association of depressive symptoms in this cohort of AMD participants. Screening for depressive symptoms in East Asian AMD patients with these characteristics should be an important component of their care.
To investigate predictive factors for changes in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at 24 months after intravitreal ranibizumab (IVR) for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
This retrospective study included 55 eyes of 55 consecutive patients (32 men and 23 women) with nAMD who received three consecutive monthly IVR injections and were re-treated as needed over a 24-month period. We used the mean changes in logarithm of the minimal angle of resolution (logMAR) BCVA at 24 months as the dependent variable in regression analysis.
The presence of intraretinal cystoid spaces in the inner nuclear layer (INLc, P = 0.004) and baseline subfoveal choroidal thickness (SFCT, P = 0.013) predicted BCVA changes from baseline to 24 months. The presence of INLc and thinning of SFCT were associated with decreased BCVA at 24 months. Thirty-five eyes without INLc showed improved logMAR BCVA, from 0.550 ± 0.273 to 0.368 ± 0.274 (P = 0.045); however, 20 eyes with INLc showed decreased logMAR BCVA, from 0.708 ± 0.347 to 0.971 ± 0.523 (P < 0.001) through the 24-month follow-up. The mean number of IVR injections during the follow-up period was 8.74 ± 4.76 in eyes without INLc and 10.63 ± 4.72 in eyes with INLc, without a statistically significant difference (P = 0.144).
Eyes with INLc or thinned SFCT showed worse visual outcomes compared with eyes without the INLc or with thick SFCT. Furthermore, eyes without INLc showed improved BCVA; however, eyes with INLc showed decreased BCVA with an as-needed regimen.
To evaluate the visual outcome after transitioning from a pro re nata (PRN) intravitreal injection regimen to a treat-and-extend (TAE) regimen for patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
A retrospective review of patients who were switched from a PRN regimen with intravitreal injections of bevacizumab, ranibizumab or aflibercept to a TAE regimen. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central retinal thickness (CRT) and type of medication used at baseline, at the time of changing treatment regimen and at the end of the study were analysed.
Twenty-one eyes of 21 patients met the inclusion criteria. Prior to the switch, the patients received a mean of 13.8 injections (median, 10; range, 3-39 injections) with the PRN regimen for 44 months (range, 3-100 months), which improved the visual acuity in five patients (24%). After a mean of 6.1 injections (median, 5; range, 3-14 injections) with the TAE regimen over 8 months (range, 2-16 months), the visual acuity improved in 12 patients (57%). The improvement in visual acuity during treatment with the TAE regimen was statistically significant (p = 0.005). The proportion of patients with a visual acuity of 0.2 or better was significantly higher after treatment with the TAE regimen than after treatment with the PRN regimen (p = 0.048). No significant differences in CRT were found between the two treatment regimens.
Even after prolonged treatment and a high number of intravitreal injections, switching AMD patients from a PRN regimen to a strict TAE regimen significantly improves visual acuity.
To assess the effects of monthly intravitreal ranibizumab injections in patients with vascularized pigment epithelium detachment (vPED) secondary to age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
A total of 40 patients were prospectively observed and treated monthly with 0.5 mg ranibizumab injections (ClinicalTrials.gov Ident. NCT00976222). Inclusion criterion was a treatment-naïve vPED lesion with a minimum height of ≥200 μm. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) were evaluated at all visits. Fluorescein angiography and indocyanine green angiography were performed at baseline and quarterly. Lesions were differentiated between serous vascular PED (svPED, group A, 29 patients) and fibrovascular PED (fPED, group B, 11 patients). Primary outcome was the effectivity of continuous monthly treatment during a 12-month period as measured in change in BCVA. Secondary outcomes were change in PED height and PED greatest linear diameter (GLD). Further secondary outcomes were the presence of subretinal fluid and prognostic markers of an impending retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) tear: PED lesion height and diameter, ratio of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) size to PED size, hyperreflective lines in near-infrared images, microrips and subretinal cleft.
Mean BCVA was 56.9 ± 11.5 letters (A: 55.4 ± 10.8; B: 59.1 ± 13.4) at baseline and 55.1 ± 15.9 (A: 53.7 ± 17.0; B: 58.9 ± 12.7) at 12-month follow-up. Excluding the RPE tear patients, the svPED group showed an increase in BCVA from 56.1 ± 10.3 at baseline to 62.4 ± 10.2 at 12-month follow-up (p = 0.048). Best-corrected visual acuity in patient who developed a RPE tear was 55.8 ± 12.5 at baseline and 37.1 ± 14.9 at 12-month follow-up. The mean change in PED height was -242.1 μm ± 285.5 (A: -427.3 μm ± 299.7; B: -51.6 μm ± 99.5). The mean decrease in PED GLD was -471.8 μm ± 727.6 (A: -738.9 μm ± 788.2; B: -10.4 μm ± 185.6). In group A, 10 patients developed a RPE tear (25%) after a mean of 3.6 injections. No tear was documented in group B. Lesion height, ratio of CNV size to PED size and presence of hyperreflective lines differed significantly between patients with and without RPE tear development.
Serous vascular PED lesions showed an improvement regarding BCVA and morphologic characteristics unless an RPE tear occurred. In fPED lesions, a functional and morphological stabilization was observed. Monthly ranibizumab injections are an effective treatment regarding the resorption of subretinal fluid in vPED due to AMD. Patients should be screened for the presence of morphologic risk factors for RPE tear development before and during treatment.
Large submacular hemorrhage, an uncommon manifestation of neovascular age-related macular degeneration, may also occur with idiopathic polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy. Submacular hemorrhage damages photoreceptors owing to iron toxicity, fibrin meshwork contraction, and reduced nutrient flux, with subsequent macular scarring. Clinical and experimental studies support prompt treatment, as tissue damage can occur within 24 hours. Without treatment the natural history is poor, with a mean final visual acuity (VA) of 20/1600. Reported treatments include retinal pigment epithelial patch, macular translocation, pneumatic displacement, intravitreal or subretinal tissue plasminogen activator, intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) drugs, and combinations thereof. In the absence of comparative studies, we combined eligible studies to assess the VA change before and after each treatment option. The greatest improvement occurred after combined pars plana vitrectomy, subretinal tissue plasminogen activator, intravitreal gas, and anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment, with VA improving from 20/1000 to 20/400. The best final VA occurred using combined intravitreal tissue plasminogen activator, gas, and anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy, with VA improving from 20/200 to 20/100. Both treatments had an acceptable safety profile, but most studies were small, and larger randomized controlled trials are needed to determine both safety and efficacy.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most common cause of blindness, accounting for 8.7% of all blindness globally. Vision loss is caused ultimately by apoptosis of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and overlying photoreceptors. Treatments are evolving for the wet form of the disease; however, these do not exist for the dry form. Complement factor H polymorphism in exon 9 (Y402H) has shown a strong association with susceptibility to AMD resulting in complement activation, recruitment of phagocytes, RPE damage, and visual decline. We have derived and characterized induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines from two subjects without AMD and low-risk genotype and two patients with advanced AMD and high-risk genotype and generated RPE cells that show local secretion of several proteins involved in the complement pathway including factor H, factor I, and factor H-like protein 1. The iPSC RPE cells derived from high-risk patients mimic several key features of AMD including increased inflammation and cellular stress, accumulation of lipid droplets, impaired autophagy, and deposition of "drüsen"-like deposits. The low- and high-risk RPE cells respond differently to intermittent exposure to UV light, which leads to an improvement in cellular and functional phenotype only in the high-risk AMD-RPE cells. Taken together, our data indicate that the patient specific iPSC model provides a robust platform for understanding the role of complement activation in AMD, evaluating new therapies based on complement modulation and drug testing. Stem Cells 2017;35:2305-2320.
To examine the association between retinal vascular caliber and early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in an Indian population.
A total of 3112 Indian participants aged ≥40 years from the population-based Singapore Indian Eye Study who had data available on retinal vascular caliber measurements and AMD status were included. Retinal arteriolar and venular calibers were measured from digital photographs using computer-assisted software according to a standardized protocol. Images of the macular region were graded according to the modified Wisconsin age-related maculopathy grading system. Right eyes were selected for analyses. Binary logistic regression models were used to assess the association, adjusting for age, sex, systolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, random blood glucose, body mass index, and the companion retinal vascular caliber.
A total of 107 participants (3.4%) were diagnosed with early AMD. Neither arteriolar nor venular caliber was related to AMD. For early AMD, the age-, sex-, and companion retinal vascular caliber-adjusted odds ratio (OR) per standard deviation (SD) decrease in arteriolar caliber was 0.95 (95% CI 0.84-1.31; p = 0.671), and per SD increase in venular caliber was OR: 0.96 (95% CI: 0.77-1.20); p = 0.714. No trend was found after categorizing retinal vascular calibers into quartiles. Multivariate adjustment and stratified analyses did not alter these results.
Retinal vascular calibers were not related to early AMD among Indian participants. These findings differ from those of several previous studies performed in Caucasian and Asian populations.
The aim of the study was to investigate blood flow in choroidal neovascular membrane in remission phase of neovascular age-related macular degeneration using optical coherence tomography (OCT) angiography.
OCT angiography was obtained in eyes with remission phase of neovascular age-related macular degeneration after treatments, defined as no exudative change (such as macular edema, subretinal fluid, and subretinal hemorrhage) observed in eyes without any treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration within the previous 6 months. Irregular blood flows shown in the segmentation of outer retina detected by OCT angiography were considered as blood flows in choroidal neovascular membrane. The vascular area and vessel density were obtained from OCT angiography images.
Twenty eyes of 20 patients were included in this analysis. The blood flows in choroidal neovascular membrane were observed in all eyes (100%) using OCT angiography. The mean vascular area was 3.81 ± 3.41 mm and the mean vessel density of lesion was 28.9 ± 8.2%. The vessel density was significantly correlated with best-corrected visual acuity and duration of remission (best-corrected visual acuity: P = 0.008, r = -0.576; duration of remission: P = 0.017, r = -0.525, respectively).
Optical coherence tomography angiography revealed that blood flows in choroidal neovascular membrane remained in eyes with clinically inactive neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
In this review, the authors summarized the drugs in treatment of the age-related macular degeneration (AMD or ARMD), including the pathogenesis of the age-related macular degeneration at home and abroad, dosage forms used in the treatment, and the drugs research and development directions in the future. AMD disease is the third largest blinding diseases all over the world, with an incidence of 6.62%. The dosage form of the traditional medicine is mostly oral formulations, playing a role in body, while the newly dosage form is topical drug delivery formulation. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) has certain advantages in the treatment of AMD disease and the development of topical drug delivery preparations with newly preparation technologies would have a very bright prospect in the future.
Intravitreal injections of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor agents, such as ranibizumab, have significantly improved the management of neovascular age-related macular degeneration. This study used patient-level simulation modelling to estimate the number of individuals in Australia who would have been likely to avoid legal blindness or visual impairment due to neovascular age-related macular degeneration over a 2-year period as a result of intravitreal ranibizumab injections. The modelling approach used existing data for the incidence of neovascular age-related macular degeneration in Australia and outcomes from ranibizumab trials. Blindness and visual impairment were defined as visual acuity in the better-seeing eye of worse than 6/60 or 6/12, respectively. In 2010, 14,634 individuals in Australia were estimated to develop neovascular age-related macular degeneration who would be eligible for ranibizumab therapy. Without treatment, 2246 individuals would become legally blind over 2 years. Monthly 0.5 mg intravitreal ranibizumab would reduce incident blindness by 72% (95% simulation interval, 70-74%). Ranibizumab given as needed would reduce incident blindness by 68% (64-71%). Without treatment, 4846 individuals would become visually impaired over 2 years; this proportion would be reduced by 37% (34-39%) with monthly intravitreal ranibizumab, and by 28% (23-33%) with ranibizumab given as needed. These data suggest that intravitreal injections of ranibizumab, given either monthly or as needed, can substantially lower the number of cases of blindness and visual impairment over 2 years after the diagnosis of neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
An oral treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration would be less burdensome than repeated intravitreous injections. X-82 is an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor active against vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and platelet-derived growth factor.
To undertake safety testing of oral X-82 administered for the treatment of neovascular AMD.
Phase 1, open-label, uncontrolled, dose-escalation study at 5 US retinal clinics between November 2012 and March 2015 (Retina-Vitreous Associates Medical Group, Beverly Hills, California; Blanton Eye Institute, Houston Methodist Hospital, Retina Consultants of Houston, Houston, Texas; New England Retina Associates, Guilford, Connecticut; Elman Retina Group, Baltimore, Maryland; and Retina Research Institute of Texas, Abilene). Thirty-five participants with neovascular age-related macular degeneration, 7 of whom were treatment naive.
Participants received oral X-82 for 24 weeks at 50 mg alternate days (n = 3), 50 mg daily (n = 8), 100 mg alternate days (n = 4), 100 mg daily (n = 10), 200 mg daily (n = 7), and 300 mg daily (n = 3), with intravitreous anti-VEGF therapy using predefined retreatment criteria. Every 4 weeks, participants underwent best-corrected visual acuity measurement, fundus examination, and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography.
The main outcome was adverse events. Other outcomes included visual acuity, central subfield retinal thickness, and number of anti-VEGF injections.
Of the 35 participants, the mean age was 76.8 years, 16 were men and 19 were women, and 33 were white and 2 were nonwhite. Of 25 participants (71%) who completed the 24 weeks of X-82 treatment, all except 1 maintained or improved their visual acuity (mean [SD], +3.8 [9.6] letters). Fifteen participants (60%) required no anti-VEGF injections (mean, 0.68). Mean [SD] central subfield thickness reduced by -50 [97] μm, with 8 participants (all receiving at least 100 mg daily) demonstrating sustained reductions despite no anti-VEGF injections. The most common adverse events attributed to X-82 were diarrhea (n = 6), nausea (n = 5), fatigue (n = 5), and transaminase elevation (n = 4). A dose relationship to the transaminase elevations was not identified; all normalized when X-82 was discontinued. All but 1 were asymptomatic. Ten participants withdrew consent or discontinued prematurely, 6 owing to adverse events attributed to X-82 including leg cramps (n = 2), elevated alanine aminotransferase (n = 2), diarrhea (n = 1), and nausea/anorexia (n = 1).
X-82 can be associated with reversible, elevated liver enzymes; hence, liver function testing is needed to identify those unsuited to treatment. Although 17% of participants discontinued X-82 owing to AEs, those who completed the study had lower than expected anti-VEGF injection rates. Further studies appear justified, with a phase 2 randomized clinical study under way.
To assess whether the serum levels of mannose-binding lectin of the lectin complement pathway are associated with age-related macular degeneration.
Patients with age-related macular degeneration and age-matched controls underwent full ophthalmologic examination and optical coherence tomography. Using a time-resolved immunofluorometric assay, blood samples were evaluated to determine the serum mannose-binding lectin levels.
A total of 136 individuals were evaluated, including 68 patients with age-related macular degeneration (34 exudative and 34 nonexudative) and 68 age-matched controls. The median mannose-binding lectin level was 608 ng/mL (range, 30-3,415 ng/mL) in patients with age-related macular degeneration and 739 ng/mL (range, 30-6,039 ng/mL) in controls, with no difference between the groups. Additionally, the median mannose-binding lectin level was 476 ng/mL (range, 30-3,415 ng/mL) in exudative cases and 692 ng/mL (range, 30-2,587 ng/mL) in nonexudative cases.
Serum mannose-binding lectin levels were not associated with age-related macular degeneration or with the exudative and nonexudative forms of the disease.
Comparative data appertaining to the long-term effects of Aflibercept or Ranibizumab in newly diagnosed cases of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) over follow-up periods exceeding 12 months in clinical routine are scarce.
In this retrospective comparative analysis, a case series of patients with treatment-naïve nAMD and requiring anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy in a routine clinical setting were treated with either Aflibercept [Afl (n = 106)] or Ranibizumab [Ran (n = 47)]. During the drug-loading phase, 3 monthly injections were administered. Thereafter, a treat-and-extend protocol was pursued for a maximum of 24 months. Ran was administered predominantly in eyes with classical lesions; Afl was administered in all others. The primary outcome parameters included anatomical and functional stability after 24 months.
Patients were comparable regarding age, gender distribution, and lens status. Fewer patients presented with intraretinal fluid in the Afl- than in the Ran group at diagnosis (46.2% vs. 67.4%; P = 0.02), but not after the drug-loading phase. After the drug-loading phase, visual acuity [-4.2 letters (Afl) vs. -4.5 letters (Ran); P = 0.78] and the central foveal thickness remained stable. Linked to the lesion type, the number of scheduled clinical visits during the course of 24 months was higher for the Ran- than for the Afl group [11.9 ± 4.7 visits (Ran) vs. 8.4 ± 3.1 visits (Afl); P = 0.0005]. However, the total number of injections was similar [10.5 ± 2.8 (Ran) vs. 11.7 ± 3.6 (Afl); P = 0.06].
Based on tailoring according to the lesion type in cases of nAMD, the anatomical and the functional outcomes of treatment with either Afl or Ran were comparable for a maximum of 2 years.
Macular hole (MH) is part of a group of age-related degenerative diseases characterized by pathology of vitreomacular interface. Similarly, neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) affects older patients and is a leading cause of irreversible visual loss. The purpose of this case series is to describe the development of full-thickness MH in patients with nAMD, following antivascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) treatment.
Participants in this case series were four patients with nAMD, who received anti-VEGF injections with variable therapeutic response to treatment. Patients were examined at baseline (when AMD was diagnosed) and monthly thereafter. The examination included visual acuity measurement, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, and optical coherence tomography.
All patients were found to develop full-thickness MH within 1-4 months after the last anti-VEGF injection, even in the absence of pre-existing vitreomacular interface abnormalities in some cases. The median number of injections before the MH formation was 3.
MH formation may represent an adverse effect of anti-VEGF treatment in patients with nAMD and could be also coexisting pathology with nAMD in older individuals.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible blindness in elderly people globally. It is estimated that there will be more Asians with AMD than the rest of the world combined by 2050. In Asian populations, polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) is a common subtype of exudative AMD, while choroidal neovascularization secondary to AMD (CNV-AMD) is the typical subtype in Western populations. The two subtypes share many common clinical features and risk factors, but also have different epidemiological and clinical characteristics, natural history and treatment outcomes that point to distinct pathophysiological processes. Recent research in the fields of genetics, proteomics and imaging has provided further clarification of differences between PCV and CNV-AMD. Importantly, these differences have manifested as disparity in response to intravitreal injections of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) treatment between PCV and CNV-AMD, emphasizing the need for accurate diagnosis of PCV and in distinguishing PCV from CNV-AMD, particularly in Asian patients. Current clinical trials of intravitreal anti-VEGF therapy and photodynamic therapy will provide clearer perspectives of evidence-based management of PCV and may lead to paradigm shifts in therapeutic strategies away from those currently employed in the treatment of CNV-AMD. Further research is needed to clarify the relative contribution of specific pathways in inflammation, complement activation, extracellular matrix dysregulation, lipid metabolism and angiogenesis to the pathogenesis of PCV. Findings from this research, together with improved diagnostic technology and new therapeutics, will facilitate more optimal management of Asian AMD. 
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of irreversible visual loss and is primarily treated with nutritional supplementation as well as with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents for certain patients with neovascular disease. AMD is a complex disease with both genetic and environmental risk factors. In addition, treatment outcomes from nutritional supplementation and anti-VEGF agents vary considerably. Therefore, it is reasonable to suspect that there may be pharmacogenetic influences on these treatments. Many series have reported individual associations with variants in complement factor H (CFH), age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 (ARMS2), and other loci. However, at this time there are no validated associations. With respect to AMD, pharmacogenetics remains an intriguing area of research but is not helpful for routine clinical management.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is one of the most common causes of adult blindness in developed countries. However, the role of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in the development and progression of early AMD is unclear.
We established the lncRNA profile of early AMD by reannotation of microarrays from the gene expression omnibus database. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to determine the expression of selected lncRNAs.
The expression profiles of 9 cases of AMD and 7 controls were studied. A total of 266 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were detected (94 upregulated and 172 downregulated). Among all the DEGs, 64 were lncRNAs. Advanced bioinformatics analyses demonstrated that differentially expressed lncRNAs could play significant roles in visual perception, sensory perception of light stimulus, and cognition. The pathway analyses showed that the two most significantly influenced Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways were those of phototransduction and purine metabolism. By the analyses of the key lncRNAs, it was found that RP11-234O6.2 was downregulated in the aging retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cellular model. Exogenous RP11-234O6.2 treatment led to increased cell viability and improved apoptosis but it did not affect the cell migration ability of aging RPE cells.
This study indicated that lncRNAs are differentially expressed in early AMD and may produce important regulative effects. An lncRNA, RP11-234O6.2, might be involved in the biological regulation of early AMD and have therapeutic potential.
To determine the association between dark adaption (DA) and different health conditions linked with age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Cross-sectional study, including patients with AMD and a control group. Age-related macular degeneration was graded according to the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) classification. We obtained data on medical history, medications, and lifestyle. Dark adaption was assessed with the extended protocol (20 minutes) of AdaptDx (MacuLogix). For analyses, the right eye or the eye with more advanced AMD was selected. Multivariate linear and logistic regressions were performed, accounting for age and AMD stage.
Seventy-eight subjects (75.6% AMD; 24.4% controls) were included. Multivariate assessments revealed that body mass index (BMI; β = 0.30, P = 0.045), taking AREDS vitamins (β = 5.51, P < 0.001), and family history of AMD (β = 2.68, P = 0.039) were significantly associated with worse rod intercept times. Abnormal DA (rod intercept time ≥ 6.5 minutes) was significantly associated with family history of AMD (β = 1.84, P = 0.006), taking AREDS supplements (β = 1.67, P = 0.021) and alcohol intake (β = 0.07, P = 0.017).
Besides age and AMD stage, a higher body mass index, higher alcohol intake, and a family history of AMD seem to impair DA. In this cohort, the use of AREDS vitamins was also statistically linked with impaired DA, most likely because of an increased severity of disease in subjects taking them.
To define the frequency and quantify the progression of macular atrophy (MA) in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration undergoing treatment with antivascular endothelial growth factor therapy for >2 years.
Fifty-four eyes of 46 patients (86.7 ± 6.8 years, 53.7% women) diagnosed with wet age-related macular degeneration were included in this retrospective study. Eyes that received photodynamic therapy or laser treatment were excluded. All eyes were imaged at baseline and after 2 years with the Cirrus spectral domain optical coherence tomography using a 512 × 128 macular cube scan protocol centered on the fovea. Optical coherence tomography en face fundus images were obtained for each 3-dimensional data set using the U.S. Food and Drug Administration-cleared Advanced RPE Analysis software, which automatically identifies atrophic areas by segmenting regions of increased reflectivity in en face choroidal slab images. Segmentation errors were manually corrected by trained Doheny Image Reading Center graders using a standardized grading protocol. The prevalence rates of atrophy at baseline and at 2-years follow-up and enlargement rates were computed. Baseline demographic factors and types and numbers of antivascular endothelial growth factor injections received over time were correlated with the development and enlargement of atrophy.
Macular atrophy was noted at baseline in 32 (59.3%) eyes and progressed in all eyes over the next 2 years. Among the 28 eyes without atrophy at baseline, MA developed by 2 years in 6 eyes (21.4% of eyes without MA at baseline). Of note, 22 eyes (40.7% of overall cohort) never developed atrophy during the course of the study. Among eyes with atrophy at baseline, the annual growth rate of MA was found to be 0.89 ± 0.93 mm. A multiple regression analysis was performed to evaluate the influence of gender, age, smoking status, medication injected, and number of injections on MA. Except for the number of total injections (R = 0.3, P < 0.01), the studied variables could not significantly predict development or progression of MA (F [0.73, 13] = 0.378, P = 0.86, R = 0.05). However, the study was not powered to detect small effects.
Macular atrophy is a frequent finding in eyes with wet age-related macular degeneration both before and after antivascular endothelial growth factor therapy. The frequency of new optical coherence tomography-defined atrophy (21% at 2 years) after starting therapy was close to the rates reported in CATT, IVAN, and HARBOR. The rate of MA enlargement was positively correlated with the number of injections, but did not appear to be greater than that reported for atrophy in the absence of choroidal neovascularization.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common vision-threatening condition affecting the elderly. AMD shares common risk factors and processes, including vascular and inflammatory pathways, with many systemic disorders. Associations have been reported between AMD and hypertension, cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, dyslipidaemia, chronic kidney disease and neurodegenerative disorders. An increasing amount of evidence suggests that individuals with AMD are also at risk of systemic diseases such as stroke. In this review, we summarize the latest evidence to support the notion that AMD is an ocular manifestation of systemic disease processes, and discuss the potential systemic side effects of ocular AMD therapy of which general physicians should be aware. Recent genetic discoveries and understanding of the pathogenic pathways in AMD in relation to systemic disorders are also highlighted. 
To evaluate the 6-month safety and efficacy of ziv-aflibercept intravitreal injections for treating exudative age-related macular degeneration.
Fifteen patients with unilateral exudative age-related macular degeneration were enrolled. The best-corrected visual acuity was measured and spectral domain optical coherence tomography was performed at baseline and monthly. Full-field electroretinography and multifocal electroretinography were obtained at baseline and 4, 13, and 26 weeks after the first injection. All patients received three monthly intravitreal injections of ziv-aflibercept (1.25 mg) followed by as-needed treatment.
Between baseline and 26 weeks, the mean logMAR best-corrected visual acuity improved (P = 0.00408) from 0.93 ± 0.4 (20/200) to 0.82 ± 0.5 (20/160) logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution, respectively; the central retinal thickness decreased significantly (P = 0.0007) from 490.3 ± 155.1 microns to 327.9 ± 101.5 microns; the mean total macular volume decreased significantly (P < 0.0001) from 9.51 ± 1.36 mm to 8.08 ± 1.34 mm, and the a-wave implicit time increased, with no differences in the other full-field electroretinography parameters. The average multifocal electroretinography macular responses within the first central 15° showed significantly (P < 0.05) increased P1 amplitudes at 26 weeks. No systemic or ocular complications developed.
Intravitreal ziv-aflibercept significantly improved the best-corrected visual acuity, multifocal electroretinography amplitudes, central retinal thickness, and total macular volume from baseline to 26 weeks. No retinal toxicity on full-field electroretinography or adverse events occurred during the follow-up period.
To investigate healthcare experiences of patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and determine whether a previous survey and Royal College of Ophthalmologists (RCOphth) management guidelines brought improvements.
Cross-sectional survey of Macular Society members in 2013 compared with previous 1999 survey.
UK Postal Questionnaires.
1169 respondents in 2013 (1187 in 1999).
Publication of 1999 survey results (2002), and RCOphth AMD guidelines (2009).
Respondents answered questions about experiences at diagnosis. Five questions were replicated from the 1999 survey for direct comparison in the 2013 survey which included additional questions based on 2009 RCOphth recommendations for information and support provision for patients with AMD.
Most 2013 survey respondents were given the name of their macular condition (91%), felt the healthcare professional was interested in them (71%) and were satisfied overall with the diagnostic consultation (76%). These outcomes show significant improvement since 1999. Within the 2013 sample, multivariable analyses showed gradual trends of improvement over time in: provision of written information, Macular Society information and receiving appropriate help, support and advice at diagnosis. Only overall satisfaction with the diagnostic consultation (but not the other nine areas of information and support provision studied) significantly improved in the time after publication of the RCOphth 2009 guidelines. There were no significant improvements associated with the publication of the 1999 survey results. Low information and support provision remained, for example, 44% of respondents diagnosed after the RCOphth 2009 guidelines reported not receiving information on what to do if vision deteriorated. Lack of such information at diagnosis was significantly associated with registration as sight impaired (p<0.01). Reports of general practitioner (GP) knowledge of AMD remained low: 39% reported their GP was 'not at all well informed'. The 2013 respondents reported lower levels of help and support from GPs than 1999 respondents (p<0.001).
Patients diagnosed with AMD after 1999 (vs before 1999) reported better experiences at diagnostic consultation. However, information and support provision at diagnosis, and satisfaction with GPs remained low.
To assess the cost-effectiveness of optometrist-led follow-up monitoring reviews for patients with quiescent neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) in community settings (including high street opticians) compared with ophthalmologist-led reviews in hospitals.
A model-based cost-effectiveness analysis with a 4-week time horizon, based on a 'virtual' non-inferiority randomised trial designed to emulate a parallel group design.
A virtual internet-based clinical assessment, conducted at community optometry practices, and hospital ophthalmology clinics.
Ophthalmologists with experience in the age-related macular degeneration service; fully qualified optometrists not participating in nAMD shared care schemes.
The participating optometrists and ophthalmologists classified lesions from vignettes and were asked to judge whether any retreatment was required. Vignettes comprised clinical information, colour fundus photographs and optical coherence tomography images. Participants' classifications were validated against experts' classifications (reference standard). Resource use and cost information were attributed to these retreatment decisions.
Correct classification of whether further treatment is needed, compared with a reference standard.
The mean cost per assessment, including the subsequent care pathway, was £411 for optometrists and £397 for ophthalmologists: a cost difference of £13 (95% CI -£18 to £45). Optometrists were non-inferior to ophthalmologists with respect to the overall percentage of lesions correctly assessed (difference -1.0%; 95% CI -4.5% to 2.5%).
In the base case analysis, the slightly larger number of incorrect retreatment decisions by optometrists led to marginally and non-significantly higher costs. Sensitivity analyses that reflected different practices across eye hospitals indicate that shared care pathways between optometrists and ophthalmologists can be identified which may reduce demands on scant hospital resources, although in light of the uncertainty around differences in outcome and cost it remains unclear whether the differences between the 2 care pathways are significant in economic terms.
ISRCTN07479761; Pre-results.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of blindness in the elderly. The two types of AMD are: dry and wet AMD. While laser-induced choroidal neovascularization has been used extensively in the studies of wet AMD, there is no established mouse model that fully recapitulates the cardinal features of dry AMD. A lack of appropriate mouse model for dry AMD has hampered the translational research on the pathogenesis of the disease and the development of therapeutic agents. We hypothesized that 5XFAD mice, an animal model for the study of Alzheimer's disease, can be used as a mouse model for dry AMD with regard to the amyloid beta (Aβ) related pathology. In this study, the ultrastructure of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) of 5XFAD mice was analyzed using transmission electron microscopy. Of importance, the aged 5XFAD mice show ultrastructural changes in the RPE and Bruch's membrane (BM) that are compatible with the cardinal features of human dry AMD, including a loss of apical microvilli and basal infolding of the RPE, increased BM thickness, basal laminar and linear deposits, and accumulation of lipofuscin granules and undigested photoreceptor outer segment-laden phagosomes. In microarray-based analysis, the RPE complex of the aged 5XFAD mice shows differential gene expression profiles consistent with dry AMD in the inflammation response, immune reaction pathway, and decreased retinol metabolism. Taken together, we suggest that aged 5XFAD mice can be used as a mouse model of dry AMD to study Aβ related pathology and develop a new therapeutic approaches.
Patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) usually attend regular reviews, even when the disease is quiescent. Reviews are burdensome to health services, patients and carers.
To compare the proportion of correct lesion classifications made by community-based optometrists and ophthalmologists from vignettes of patients; to estimate the cost-effectiveness of community follow-up by optometrists compared with follow-up by ophthalmologists in the Hospital Eye Service (HES); to ascertain views of patients, their representatives, optometrists, ophthalmologists and clinical commissioners on the proposed shared care model.
Community-based optometrists and ophthalmologists in the HES classified lesions from vignettes comprising clinical information, colour fundus photographs and optical coherence tomography images. Participants' classifications were validated against experts' classifications (reference standard).
Internet-based application.
Ophthalmologists had to have ≥ 3 years post-registration experience in ophthalmology, have passed part 1 of the Royal College of Ophthalmologists, Diploma in Ophthalmology or equivalent examination, and have experience in the age-related macular degeneration service. Optometrists had to be fully qualified, be registered with the General Optical Council for ≥ 3 years and not be participating in nAMD shared care.
The trial sought to emulate a conventional trial in comparing optometrists' and ophthalmologists' decision-making, but vignettes, not patients, were assessed; therefore, there were no interventions. Participants received training prior to assessing vignettes.
Primary outcome - correct classification of the activity status of a lesion based on a vignette, compared with a reference standard. Secondary outcomes - frequencies of potentially sight-threatening errors, participants' judgements about specific lesion components, participant-rated confidence in their decisions and cost-effectiveness of follow-up by community-based optometrists compared with HES ophthalmologists.
In total, 155 participants registered for the trial; 96 (48 in each professional group) completed training and main assessments and formed the analysis population. Optometrists and ophthalmologists achieved 1702 out of 2016 (84.4%) and 1722 out of 2016 (85.4%) correct classifications, respectively [odds ratio (OR) 0.91, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.66 to 1.25; <i>p</i> = 0.543]. Optometrists' decision-making was non-inferior to ophthalmologists' with respect to the pre-specified limit of 10% absolute difference (0.298 on the odds scale). Frequencies of sight-threatening errors were similar for optometrists and ophthalmologists [57/994 (5.7%) vs. 62/994 (6.2%), OR 0.93, 95% CI 0.55 to 1.57; <i>p</i> = 0.789]. Ophthalmologists assessed lesion components as present less often than optometrists and were more confident about their lesion classifications than optometrists. The mean care-pathway cost for assessment was very similar by group, namely £397.33 for ophthalmologists and £410.78 for optometrists. The optometrist-led monitoring reviews were slightly more costly and less effective than ophthalmologist-led reviews, although the differences were extremely small. There was consensus that optometrist-led monitoring has the potential to reduce clinical workload and be more patient-centred. However, potential barriers are ophthalmologists' perceptions of optometrists' competence, the need for clinical training, the ability of the professions to work collaboratively and the financial feasibility of shared care for Clinical Commissioning Groups.
The ability of optometrists to make nAMD retreatment decisions from vignettes is non-inferior to that of ophthalmologists. Various barriers to implementing shared cared for nAMD were identified.
The Effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and acceptability of Community versus Hospital Eye Service follow-up for patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration with quiescent disease (ECHoES) study web application was robust and could be used for future training or research. The benefit of reducing HES workload was not considered in the economic evaluation. A framework of programme budgeting and marginal analysis could explicitly explore the resource implications of shifting resources within a given health service area, as the benefit of reducing HES workload was not considered in the economic evaluation. Future qualitative research could investigate professional differences of opinion that were identified in multidisciplinary focus groups.
Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN07479761.
This project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in <i>Health Technology Assessment</i>; Vol. 20, No. 80. See the NIHR Journals Library website for further project information.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a complex disorder with multifactorial etiology, caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Innate immunity appears to play a key role in the pathogenesis of AMD. The purpose of this study was to determine whether common variation in the human toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2 and 4 alters the risk of AMD.
A total of 183 patients with AMD and 200 disease-free control subjects were enrolled. The genotyping of polymorphisms TLR2 (TLR2-Arg753Gln: rs5743708) and TLR4 (TLR4-Asp299Gly: rs4986790; TLR4-Thr399Ile: rs4986791) were done using real-time PCR.
TLR2 Arg753Gln genotype had approximately four times greater risk of AMD compared with TLR2 Arg753Arg genotype (OR = 3.88; 95% CI: 1.76-8.75, p = 0.001). TLR2 Arg753Gln genotype was significantly higher in the patients with dry-type AMD (16%) and wet-type AMD (18%) than in the control (5%) subjects (p = 0.005 and p = 0.0008, respectively). There were no significant differences in the distribution of TLR4-Asp299Gly and TLR4-Thr399Ile genotypes between AMD patients and controls (p > 0.05).
Our results suggest that TLR2 polymorphism may contribute to the pathogenesis of AMD.
In most studies, the major supplement docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is administered orally or intraperitoneally. In this study, we proposed to assess the safety and efficacy of the intravitreal injection of DHA in an age-related macular degeneration (AMD) rat model. Different concentrations of DHA were injected into the vitreous body. Histopathology and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) analysis showed that there was no difference in thickness, observable structure, or apoptosis among the untreated, normal saline, and DHA groups (0.2, 1.0, 5.0 and 10μg). However, GFAP expression was increased in the 10μg group. To investigate whether intravitreal injection of DHA could protect photoreceptors, we developed a NaIO<sub>3</sub>-induced retinal damage model in adult rats. Decreases in deformation and thickness were observed in the outer nuclear layer (ONL) after NaIO<sub>3</sub> administration but were improved with DHA injection. The NaIO<sub>3</sub> group showed a substantial reduction in the number of nuclei in ONL, whereas the DHA group showed an increase. Additionally, significant increases in SOD activity and Nrf2 expression were observed after DHA injection; GFAP and NF-κB expression levels were markedly decreased by DHA injection. Moreover, Western blotting showed that Bax, cleaved caspase-3 and CHOP were notably increased in the NaIO<sub>3</sub> group but were significantly decreased by DHA injection. Collectively, intravitreal injection of DHA is safe and effective in select doses in a NaIO<sub>3</sub>-induced AMD rat model. The current results suggest that intravitreal injection of DHA may be a new avenue for the treatment of AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a complex disease and recently the role of DNA repairing genes in its susceptibility has been studied. It has been hypothesized that polymorphism in DNA repair system genes reduce the capacity to repair DNA damages which may lead to a greater susceptibility to AMD. C-reactive protein (CRP) production is shown to enhance inflammatory processes by increasing oxidative stress and inducing DNA damage. We planned to evaluate the possible association of SMUG1 variants and their possible interaction with high sensitivity CRP levels in AMD.
We included 500 case-control samples consisting of 279 advanced type AMD patients and 221 genetically unrelated healthy controls enrolled for evaluation. Extracted-DNA samples were amplified to obtain fragments including the polymorphic region SMUG1 rs3087404. We calculated relative excess risk due to interaction (RERI), attributable proportion (AP), and synergy index (S) to clarify possible interaction of different genotypes and CRP levels for AMD.
The distribution of the genotypes were not significantly different in the AMD patients compared to that of controls (p = 0.849). The allele frequency for SMUG1 was not different between study groups. No difference of SMUG1 polymorphism between case and control groups was evident in higher CRP levels (CRP>3mg/dl) compared with lower CRP levels. SMUG1/CRP synergy indices calculated as RERI = -0.12 and AP = -0.18 while S was not calculable.
Our study showed that c.-31A/G-SMUG1 genotypes/alleles do not have any association with the occurrence or severity of advanced type AMD. There was no interaction of CRP levels and SMUG1 genotypes in AMD susceptibility.
To determine SLCO1B1 rs4149056 and rs2306283 gene polymorphisms and SLCO1B1 serum levels in patients with early and exudative age-related macular degeneration.
The study enrolled 206 patients with exudative AMD, 253 patients with early AMD and 301 control subjects. DNA was extracted from peripheral venous blood leukocytes using commercial kits. Genotyping of SLCO1B1 rs4149056 and rs2306283 was carried out using a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method. Serum SLCO1B1 levels were measured using SLCO1B1 ELISA kit.
We found statistically significant differences in genotype (T/T, T/C and C/C) distribution of SLCO1B1 rs4149056 variant between the patients with exudative AMD and control group (52.4%, 47.6% and 0% vs. 64.8%, 31.6% and 13.7%, respectively, p < 0.001). Univariate binary logistic regression analysis showed that age was a risk factor for exudative AMD development. Also, T/C variant was associated with 1.9-fold increased Odds ratio of exudative AMD development under a codominant model (OR = 1.863; 95% CI: 1.290;2.689; p < 0.001). The results remained of the same statistical significance after multivariate analysis. On the other hand, C allele was associated with 1.6-fold increased odds ratio of exudative AMD development (OR = 1.563; 95% CI: 1.035;2.359; p = 0.034) only after adjustment for age. No significant associations were found in analysis of genotypes and alleles at rs2306283. Serum SLCO1B1 concentration was significantly higher in early AMD patients than in healthy controls (median, IQR: 2.92 ng/ml, 5.01 ng/ml versus 1.26 ng/ml, 2.63 ng/ml, respectively, p = 0.025), as well as in exudative AMD patients than in controls (median, IQR: 2.72 ng/ml, 5.71 ng/ml versus 1.26 ng/ml, 2.63 ng/ml, respectively, p = 0.002). Furthermore, subjects with rs4149056 T/C genotype had higher SLCO1B1 serum levels than those with T/T genotype (median, IQR: 3.73 ng/ml, 3.14 ng/ml versus 1.23 ng/ml, 1.47 ng/ml, respectively, p = 0.037).
Our study determined that SLCO1B1 (c.521 T > C) rs4149056 T/C genotype and C allele may be associated with exudative age-related macular degeneration, as well as with elevated serum SLCO1B1 levels. Also, higher serum SLCO1B1 levels were found to be associated with early and exudative age-related macular degeneration.
To study the prognostic value of optical coherence tomography hyperreflective foci (HF) in neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Charts of naive neovascular age-related macular degeneration eyes treated with intravitreal bevacizumab between January 2011 and January 2014 were reviewed, and optical coherence tomography was collected at baseline, 3 months, and 12 months. The presence, location (inner vs. outer retinal layers), and number (few = [0-10], moderate [11-20], many [>20]) of HF were graded.
Overall, charts of 111 eyes were reviewed and 76 eyes of 73 patients fulfilled inclusion criteria. Baseline best-corrected visual acuity was lower in eyes with HF > 20 (P = 0.001), inner layer HF (P = 0.009), increased central retinal thickness (P < 0.001), and intraretinal fluid (P < 0.001). Baseline HF > 20 (P = 0.002), inner layer HF (P = 0.01), increased central retinal thickness (P < 0.001), and intraretinal fluid (P = 0.001) had worst best-corrected visual acuity at 12 months. Eyes with intraretinal fluid, HF > 20, and HF adjacent to intraretinal fluid demonstrated a greater reduction in central retinal thickness; only baseline HF > 20 remained significant in multivariate analysis (P < 0.001). Eyes with a reduction in HF (P = 0.02) and resolution of inner layer HF (P = 0.01) had a greater central retinal thickness reduction.
Quantity and location of HF are of prognostic value in intravitreal bevacizumab-treated naive neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Increased awareness of specialists interpreting optical coherence tomography scans toward the number and location of HF is prudent.
In this review we will discuss the links between autophagy, a mechanism involved in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis and controlling cellular waste management, and the DNA damage response (DDR), comprising various mechanisms preserving the integrity and stability of the genome. A reduced autophagy capacity in retinal pigment epithelium has been shown to be connected in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), an eye disease. This degenerative disease is a major and increasing cause of vision loss in the elderly in developed countries, primarily due to the profound accumulation of intra- and extracellular waste: lipofuscin and drusen. An abundance of reactive oxygen species is produced in the retina since this tissue has a high oxygen demand and contains mitochondria-rich cells. The retina is exposed to light and it also houses many photoactive molecules. These factors are clearly reflected in both the autophagy and DNA damage rates, and in both nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. It remains to be revealed whether DNA damage and DDR capacity have a more direct role in the development of AMD.
To present the clinical relevance of the anatomical classification of the neovascular form of Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD).
Critical analysis of the current situation in the management of patients with neovascular AMD, by reviewing the available scientific evidence with regards to the classification of the types of neovascular lesion by angiography and optical coherence tomography (OCT).
The classification of the neovascular lesion type secondary to AMD by OCT in type 1 lesions (under the pigment epithelium), type 2 (subretinal), and type 3 (retinal angiomatous proliferation), provides an added value in allowing to establish a long-term visual prognosis, an estimate of the number of treatments that a certain case may require, and a stratification of the risk for secondary geographic atrophy.
Incorporating OCT to the initial qualitative analysis of cases with neovascular AMD offers an added value superior to that provided by the angiography, with the relevant clinical implications.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a major cause of blindness among the elderly in the developed world. Genetic analysis of AMD has identified 34 high-risk loci associated with AMD. The genes at these high risk loci belong to diverse biological pathways, suggesting different mechanisms leading to AMD pathogenesis. Thus, therapies targeting a single pathway for all AMD patients will likely not be universally effective. Recent evidence suggests defects in mitochondria (mt) of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) may constitute a key pathogenic event in some AMD patients. The purpose of this study is to determine if individuals with a specific genetic background have a greater propensity for mtDNA damage. We used human eyebank tissues from 76 donors with AMD and 42 age-matched controls to determine the extent of mtDNA damage in the RPE that was harvested from the macula using a long extension polymerase chain reaction assay. Genotype analyses were performed for ten common AMD-associated nuclear risk alleles (ARMS2, TNFRSF10A, CFH, C2, C3, APOE, CETP, LIPC, VEGF and COL10A1) and mtDNA haplogroups. Sufficient samples were available for genotype association with mtDNA damage for TNFRSF10A, CFH, CETP, VEGFA, and COL10A1. Our results show that AMD donors carrying the high risk allele for CFH (C) had significantly more mtDNA damage compared with donors having the wild-type genetic profile. The data from an additional 39 donors (12 controls and 27 AMD) genotyped for CFH alleles further supported these findings. Taken together, these studies provide the rationale for a more personalized approach for treating AMD by uncovering a significant correlation between the CFH high risk allele and accelerated mtDNA damage. Patients harboring this genetic risk factor may benefit from therapies that stabilize and protect the mt in the RPE.
To evaluate the efficacy of intravitreal aflibercept administered to patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration.
70 patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration confirmed clinically and in additional diagnostic procedures (fluorescein angiography and spectral domain-optical coherence tomography) were enrolled. All patients were administered three doses of intravitreal aflibercept at one-month intervals. Some patients (seven) received an additional injection of the drug two months after the last of the three injections. The best-corrected visual acuity and the optical coherence tomography findings were assessed at baseline and after the treatment.
At baseline, the mean best corrected visual acuity was 0.20. After the injection of aflibercept it improved to the mean value of 0.32 with the difference being statistically significant (p < 0.001, Student's t-test). The mean central subfield thickness at baseline was 311.4 μm. It decreased to mean value of 254.5 pμn with the difference being statistically significant (p<0.001, Student's t-test).
Intravitreal injections of aflibercept improved clinical and anatomical parameters in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration in the initial phase of treatment.
Neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) has been described as a predominantly inflammatory and proangiogenic retino-choroidal disease. Vitreous humor (VH) is the adjacent and accessible compartment which, due to the vicinity to the retina, might best represent changes of protein-based mediators of nAMD. The aim of this clinical-experimental study was to analyze the nAMD associated VH proteome of previously untreated patients whilst taking different groups of nAMD into account, based on their clinical presentation (clinical diagnosis groups). Electrophoresis coupled online to mass spectrometry (CE-MS) as well as liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were used to analyze VH of 108 nAMD patients and 24 controls with idiopathic floaters. A total of 101 different proteins with at least two unique peptides could be identified. Using a stringent statistical analysis with implementation of the closed test principle, we were able to identify four proteins that may be involved in the pathophysiology of nAMD: Clusterin, opticin, pigment epithelium-derived factor and prostaglandin-H2 d-isomerase. Using independent samples, ROC-Area under the curve was determined proving the validity of the results: Clusterin 0.747, opticin 0.656, pigment epithelium-derived factor 0.514, prostaglandin-H2 d-isomerase 0.712. In addition, validation through ELISA measurements was performed. The identified proteins may serve as potential biomarkers or even targets of therapy for nAMD.
To evaluate the long-term outcomes of intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) monotherapy for patients diagnosed with submacular hemorrhage secondary to exudative age-related macular degeneration.
This retrospective, observational study included 49 patients (49 eyes) who initially presented with submacular hemorrhage associated with exudative age-related macular degeneration and who were followed-up for at least 24 months. Only eyes that were treated with intravitreal anti-VEGF monotherapy were included in the study. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) measurements obtained at diagnosis, six months, and the final visit were compared. The associations of BCVA at the final visit with baseline BCVA, BCVA at six months, symptom duration, hemorrhage extent, and central foveal thickness were also analyzed.
Over the course of follow-up (mean, 32.1 ± 8.5 months), an average of 5.1 ± 2.2 anti-VEGF injections were administered. Recurrent hemorrhage was noted in 13 eyes (26.5%). The mean logarithm of the minimal angle of resolution BCVA at diagnosis, six months, and the final visit were 1.40 ± 0.52, 0.87 ± 0.64, and 1.03 ± 0.83, respectively. Both baseline BCVA (p = 0.012) and BCVA at six months (p < 0.001) were significantly associated with BCVA at the final visit.
Improved visual acuity was maintained for more than two years with intravitreal anti-VEGF monotherapy. BCVA at six months is a useful clinical index to predict long-term visual prognosis.
We illustrate the effect of survival bias when investigating risk factors for eye disease in elderly populations for whom death is a competing risk. Our investigation focuses on the relationship between smoking and late age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in an observational study impacted by censoring due to death.
Statistical methodology to calculate the survivor average causal effect (SACE) as a sensitivity analysis is described, including example statistical computing code for Stata and R. To demonstrate this method, we examine the causal effect of smoking history at baseline (1990-1994) on the presence of late AMD at the third study wave (2003-2007) using data from the Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study.
Of the 40,506 participants eligible for inclusion, 38,092 (94%) survived until the start of the third study wave, 20,752 (51%) were graded for AMD (60% female, aged 47-85 years, mean 65 ± 8.7 years). Late AMD was detected in 122 participants. Logistic regression showed strong evidence of an increased risk of late AMD for current smokers compared to non-smokers (adjusted naïve odds ratio 2.99, 95% confidence interval, CI, 1.74-5.13). Among participants expected to be alive at the start of follow-up regardless of their smoking status, the estimated SACE odds ratio comparing current smokers to non-smokers was at least 3.42 (95% CI 1.57-5.15).
Survival bias can attenuate associations between harmful exposures and diseases of aging. Estimation of the SACE using a sensitivity analysis approach should be considered when conducting epidemiological research within elderly populations.
Presently, 52 independent nuclear single nucleotide polymorphisms (nSNPs) have been associated with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) but their effects do not explain all its variance. Genetic interactions between the nuclear and mitochondrial (mt) genome may unearth additional genetic loci previously unassociated with AMD risk.
Joint effects of nSNPs and selected mtSNPs were analyzed by two degree of freedom (2df) joint tests of association in the International AMD Genomics Consortium (IAMDGC) dataset (17,832 controls and 16,144 advanced AMD cases of European ancestry). Subjects were genotyped on the Illumina HumanCoreExome array. After imputation using MINIMAC and the 1000 Genomes Project Phase I reference panel, pairwise linkage disequilibrium pruning, and quality control, 3.9 million nSNPs were analyzed for interaction with mtSNPs chosen based on association in this dataset or publications: A4917G, T5004C, G12771A, and C16069T.
Novel locus TRPM1 was identified with genome-wide significant joint effects (P < 5.0 × 10-8) of two intronic TRPM1 nSNPs and AMD-associated nonsynonymous MT-ND2 mtSNP A4917G. Stratified analysis by mt allele identified an association only in 4917A (major allele) carriers (P = 4.4 × 10-9, odds ratio [OR] = 0.90, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.87-0.93). Intronic and intergenic ABHD2/RLBP1 nSNPs demonstrated genome-wide significant joint effects (2df joint test P values from 1.8 × 10-8 to 4.9 × 10-8) and nominally statistically significant interaction effects with MT-ND5 synonymous mtSNP G12771A. Although a positive association was detected in both strata, the association was stronger in 12771A subjects (P = 0.0020, OR = 2.17, 95% CI = 1.34-3.60).
These results show that joint tests of main effects and gene-gene interaction reveal associations at some novel loci that were missed when considering main effects alone.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) affects the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), a cell monolayer essential for photoreceptor survival, and is the leading cause of vision loss in the elderly. There are no disease-altering therapies for dry AMD, which is characterized by accumulation of subretinal drusen deposits and complement-driven inflammation. We report the derivation of human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) from patients with diagnosed AMD, including two donors with the rare ARMS2/HTRA1 homozygous genotype. The hiPSC-derived RPE cells produce several AMD/drusen-related proteins, and those from the AMD donors show significantly increased complement and inflammatory factors, which are most exaggerated in the ARMS2/HTRA1 lines. Using a panel of AMD biomarkers and candidate drug screening, combined with transcriptome analysis, we discover that nicotinamide (NAM) ameliorated disease-related phenotypes by inhibiting drusen proteins and inflammatory and complement factors while upregulating nucleosome, ribosome, and chromatin-modifying genes. Thus, targeting NAM-regulated pathways is a promising avenue for developing therapeutics to combat AMD.
To assess the risk factors of age-related macular degeneration in Argentina using a case-control study.
Surveys were used for subjects' antioxidant intake, age/gender, race, body mass index, hypertension, diabetes (and type of treatment), smoking, sunlight exposure, red meat consumption, fish consumption, presence of age-related macular degeneration and family history of age-related macular degeneration. Main effects models for logistic regression and ordinal logistic regression were used to analyze the results.
There were 175 cases and 175 controls with a mean age of 75.4 years and 75.5 years, respectively, of whom 236 (67.4%) were female. Of the cases with age-related macular degeneration, 159 (45.4%) had age-related macular degeneration in their left eyes, 154 (44.0%) in their right eyes, and 138 (39.4%) in both eyes. Of the cases with age-related macular degeneration in their left eyes, 47.8% had the dry type, 40.3% had the wet type, and the type was unknown for 11.9%. The comparable figures for right eyes were: 51.9%, 34.4%, and 13.7%, respectively. The main effects model was dominated by higher sunlight exposure (OR [odds ratio]: 3.3) and a family history of age-related macular degeneration (OR: 4.3). Other factors included hypertension (OR: 2.1), smoking (OR: 2.2), and being of the Mestizo race, which lowered the risk of age-related macular degeneration (OR: 0.40). Red meat/fish consumption, body mass index, and iris color did not have an effect. Higher age was associated with progression to more severe age-related macular degeneration.
Sunlight exposure, family history of age-related macular degeneration, and an older age were the significant risk factors. There may be other variables, as the risk was not explained very well by the existing factors. A larger sample may produce different and better results.
To assess the correlation between endothelial dysfunction and frequency of antivascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
We examined 64 consecutive patients with nAMD who were evaluated for endothelial function by use of peripheral arterial tonometry (EndoPAT 2000; Itamar Medical, Caesarea, Israel) at Toyama University Hospital from January 2015. We tallied the number of anti-VEGF treatments between January 2014 and December 2015 and determined the correlation between the number of anti-VEGF injections and endothelial function expressed as the reactive hyperemia index (RHI). Multiple regression analysis was also performed to identify the independent predictors of a larger number of injections.
The mean number of anti-VEGF injections was 8.2 ± 3.3. The mean lnRHI was 0.47 ± 0.17. The lnRHI correlated with the number of anti-VEGF injections (r = -0.56; P = 0.030). The multiple regression analysis revealed that endothelial function, neovascular subtypes, and treatment regimens were associated with the number of injections.
Endothelial dysfunction may affect the efficacy of anti-VEGF therapy. Neovascular subtypes may also predict a larger number of injections.
To evaluate the relative efficacy and safety of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents for the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Systematic literature review identifying RCTs comparing anti-VEGF agents to another treatment published before June 2016. Efficacy assessed by mean change in best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and central macular thickness (CMT) from baseline at up to 2 years followup. Safety assessed by proportions of patients with death, arteriothrombotic and venous thrombotic events, and at least one serious systemic adverse event at up to 2 years of followup.
Fifteen RCTs selected for meta-analysis (8320 patients). Two trials compared pegaptanib, and three trials compared ranibizumab versus control. Eight trials compared bevacizumab with ranibizumab. Two trials compared aflibercept with ranibizumab. There were no significant differences between bevacizumab and ranibizumab for BCVA at 1 or 2 years (weighted mean difference = - 0.57, 95% CI - 1.55 to 0.41, P = 0.25 and weighted mean difference = - 0.76, 95% CI - 2.25 to 0.73, P = 0.32, respectively). Ranibizumab was more effective in reducing CMT at 1 year (weighted mean difference = 4.49, 95% CI 1.13 to 7.84, P = 0.009). Risk ratios comparing rates of serious systemic adverse events at 1 and 2 years were slightly out of favour for bevacizumab. Aflibercept compared with ranibizumab demonstrated similar mean change in BCVA, reduction in CMT, and safety at 1 year.
Bevacizumab and ranibizumab had equivalent efficacy for BCVA, while ranibizumab had greater reduction in CMT and less rate of serious systemic adverse events. Aflibercept and ranibizumab had comparable efficacy for BCVA and CMT. This provides information to balance comparable effects on vision and risk of adverse events between anti-VEGF agents.
To develop a combination surgery for wet age-related macular degeneration and concurrent chronic peripheral uveitis that would include intravitreal injection of Lucentis and cryocerclage of the peripheral retina.
A total of 75 patients were examined and divided into 2 groups: the main group (37 patients) and the controls (38 patients). Patients from the main group underwent the new combination surgery, while the controls received intravitreal Lucentis alone (peripheral uveitis was managed therapeutically).
It has been found that the new combination method provides a significant and stable improvement in visual acuity (by a factor of 10) and a decrease in the area of central scotoma (by a factor of 2.95) in the postoperative period. The period needed for recovery in the central retinal thickness is also 1.6 times shorter.
The new combination surgery for wet age-related macular degeneration and concurrent chronic peripheral uveitis provides rapid reduction of inflammation in the extreme periphery of the fundus and a 1.5 times faster (as compared to traditional methods) primary restoration of topographic anatomy of the retina in the macular region.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of a treat-and-extend (TAE) regimen using intravitreal injection of aflibercept (IVA) for typical age-related macular degeneration (tAMD).
We retrospectively studied 61 treatment-naïve eyes with tAMD. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central macular thickness (CMT), central choroidal thickness (CCT), number of injections, and complications during 2 years were evaluated.
BCVA significantly improved by on average 0.13 logMAR units, and CMT and CCT significantly decreased after 2 years. The number of injections was on average 13.6. In the second year, eyes with classic choroidal neovascularization (CNV) needed significantly fewer treatments than eyes with occult CNV. Fourteen eyes, which developed subfoveal fibrosis, showed significantly poorer BCVA after 2 years. Subfoveal fibrosis was significantly common in classic CNV.
A TAE regimen using IVA for tAMD might be effective for improving BCVA and exudative changes. The exudation may be suppressed with fewer treatments in classic CNV compared to occult CNV.
To describe visual and anatomical outcomes following bi-weekly intravitreal ranibizumab/bevacizumab injections in eyes with refractory neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and pigment epithelial detachment (PED).
Retrospective, consecutive, interventional case series.
Eighteen patients diagnosed with neovascular AMD that were refractory to anti-VEGF therapy and received alternating biweekly ranibizumab/bevacizumab injections were included.
Patients with neovascular AMD and PED that were refractory to at least 11 monthly ranibizumab or bevacizumab injections were included in this study at a large, single retina practice. Following inclusion, patients received four bi-weekly alternating ranibizumab/bevacizumab intravitreal injections. After completing a course of four bi-weekly injections, patients were treated with variable regimens of intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy. The primary outcomes of the study included change in visual acuity (VA) and central foveal thickness (CFT) at eight weeks follow-up.
Study eyes had previously received a mean of 22 intravitreal anti-VEGF injections. At enrollment, mean VA was 20/95 and mean CFT was 455 µm. After four bi-weekly anti-VEGF injections, mean VA improved to 20/65 (p < 0.001), and mean CFT decreased to 387 µm (p = 0.029). In patients with PED, there was a mean 27.9% reduction in height (p = 0.046) at eight weeks' follow-up.
Four injections of bi-weekly alternating ranibizumab/bevacizumab improved visual acuity and reduced macular thickness in a number of patients with refractory neovascular AMD and PED.
To determine the joint effect of complement component 3(C3 R102G) with CC-cytokine ligand2 (CCL2-2518) or complement factor H (CFH) Y402H polymorphisms on advanced age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
In this case-control study, 233 patients with advanced AMD and 159 unrelated healthy controls enrolled for evaluation. Selected polymorphisms were determined by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism.
A combination of AA CCL2 (rs1024611) and GG C3 (R102G) genotypes resulted in a super-additivity of the risks: OR = 10.13, 95% CI 1.04-98.49, p = 0.04, adjusted OR = 7.74, 95% CI 0.71-84.75, p < 0.1, adjusted synergy indices: relative excess risk due to interaction (RERI) = 1.38, the attributable proportion due to interaction (AP) = 24.7% and the synergy index (S) = 1.43. Combination of at-risk genotypes of CFH Y402H and C3 R102G resulted in a strong super-additive risk: adjusted OR = 22.65, 95% CI 2.32-220.91, p = 0.007, adjusted AP = 90.4% and the S = 12.86. Attributable proportion of risk owing to C3-CCL2 and C3-CFH interaction calculated at 25% and 90% for advanced AMD.
We have previously shown a strong association of C3 (R102G) and CFH Y402H with AMD whereas no association was found for CCL2-2518. This study enclosed strong synergistic association of risk genotypes of C3 and CFH Y402H with AMD. We also revealed synergistic influence of CCL2-2518 and the at-risk genotype of the C3 in AMD with an estimated AP = 50.9% (adjusted AP = 24.7%). Present findings show that CCL2-2518 polymorphism is not an innocent bystander in AMD susceptibility when combined with the at-risk genotype of C3 (R102G).
To evaluate the dynamic changes of the aqueous humor levels of inflammatory factors between patients receiving intravitreal ranibizumab injection (IRI) and aflibercept injection (IAI) in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
The study was performed on 30 eyes with AMD that were scheduled to receive 3 doses of IRI (15 eyes) or IAI (15 eyes) at monthly intervals. Aqueous humor samples were collected when injection was done. The concentrations of VEGF, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-AA, interleukin (IL)-6, and IL-8 were measured in aqueous humor samples from the 30 AMD patients and 10 cataract patients (as controls) by the suspension array method.
Aqueous levels of the inflammatory factors (MCP-1, PDGF-AA, IL-6, and IL-8) were significantly correlated with each other. In both the IRI-treated eyes and the IAI-treated eyes, visual acuity and central macular thickness improved significantly, and the aqueous level of VEGF showed a significant decrease. In IAI-treated eyes, the aqueous levels of MCP-1 and PDGF-AA were significantly decreased at 2 months.
These findings suggest that the inflammatory factors are involved in the pathogenesis of AMD and also the possibility that the interaction between these inflammatory factors and IRI or IAI is different.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the main reason for blindness in elderly people in the developed countries. Current screening protocols have limitations in detecting the early signs of retinal degeneration. Therefore, it would be desirable to find novel biomarkers for early detection of AMD. Development of novel biomarkers would help in the prevention, diagnostics, and treatment of AMD. Proteomic analysis of tear film has shown promise in this research area. If an optimal set of biomarkers could be obtained from accessible body fluids, it would represent a reliable way to monitor disease progression and response to novel therapies.
Tear films were collected on Schirmer strips from a total of 22 patients (8 with wet AMD, 6 with dry AMD, and 8 control individuals). 2D electrophoresis was used to separate tear film proteins prior to their identification with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight spectrometer (MALDI-TOF/TOF) and matching with functional databases.
A total of 342 proteins were identified. Most of them were previously described in various proteomic studies concerning AMD. Shootin-1, histatin-3, fidgetin-like protein 1, SRC kinase signaling inhibitor, Graves disease carrier protein, actin cytoplasmic 1, prolactin-inducible protein 1, and protein S100-A7A were upregulated in the tear film samples isolated from AMD patients and were not previously linked with this disease in any proteomic analysis.
The upregulated proteins supplement our current knowledge of AMD pathogenesis, providing evidence that certain specific proteins are expressed into the tear film in AMD. As far we are aware, this is the first study to have undertaken a comprehensive in-depth analysis of the human tear film proteome in AMD patients.
To propose guidelines for the management of patients with wet age-related macular degeneration (wAMD), taking into account the results of large multicenter studies and clinical experience of retina experts.
A team of retina experts developed a consensus paper after three consecutive meetings. The group was focused on guidelines to help clinical decision-making around the definition of successful treatment and the definition of non-response to therapy.
Parameters suggestive of a successful response to treatments included: any gain in best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) or vision loss that is less than 5-10 Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) letters, reduction of central retinal thickness, partial or complete absorption of subretinal fluid (SRF), reduction of intraretinal fluid, reduction of pigment epithelial detachment or restoration of the anatomy of outer retinal layers. Non-response to current treatment was considered in the case of loss of BCVA greater than 10 ETDRS letters, increased retinal edema or increase of SRF as evidenced by optical coherence tomography or new bleeding in biomicroscopy.
The introduction of anti-VEGF agents revolutionized the treatment of wAMD. Given the complexity of the disease, the emerging new agents and the difference of cases recruited in clinical trials compared to those appearing in every-day practice, it is essential to individualize treatment options taking into account the results of clinical trials.
In the present study, we aimed to investigate the changes in plasma miRNA in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration.
The expression profiles of 384 miRNAs in plasma from 33 patients (22 male, 11 female) who were diagnosed with wet age-related macular degeneration with fundus examination, fundus fluorescein angiography, and optical coherence tomography and 31 controls (17 male, 14 female) were evaluated using high-throughput quantitative real-time PCR.
Our results demonstrated that the expression level of five miRNAs (miR-17-5p, miR-20a-5p, miR-24-3p, miR-106a-5p, and miR-223-3p) was significantly upregulated in patients with age-related macular degeneration when compared to the control group (p<0.05). The expression level of 11 miRNAs (miR-21-5p, miR-25-3p, miR-140-3p, miR-146b-5p, miR-192-5p, miR-335-5p, miR-342-3p, miR-374a-5p, miR-410, miR-574-3p, and miR-660-5p) was significantly downregulated in patients (p<0.05). In addition, ten miRNAs (miR-26b-5p, miR-27b-3p, miR-29a-3p, miR-139-3p, miR-212-3p, miR-324-3p, miR-324-5p, miR-532-3p, miR-744-5p, and miR-Let-7c) were expressed only in the patient group.
Our results suggest that plasma miRNA levels may change in wet age-related macular degeneration. These molecules may have an important therapeutic target in patients who are unresponsive to antivascular endothelial growth factor therapy. However, further studies must be conducted for possible effects of miRNAs in vascular disorders of eye such as age-related macular degeneration.
To give an updated review of laser approaches to non-exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
PubMed and Medline database searches were carried out using the terms "laser" and "photocoagulation" associated with "age-related macular degeneration", and latest publications up to May 2017 have been reviewed. Moreover, the design of an ongoing single-center, non-randomized, phase I-II, pilot study, the PASCAL-GA trial, coordinated by F. Bandello, MD and G. Querques, MD from the IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, is described.
Either standard or subthreshold laser strategies have been tried to induce regression of distinct phenotypes of AMD, as reticular pseudodrusen (RPD), nascent geographic atrophy (nGA), and drusen-associated geographic atrophy (DAGA), with heterogeneous results. The aim of the PASCAL-GA protocol is to assess if subthreshold laser can restore the retinal pigment epithelium function in eyes with RPD and nGA offering a protective effect against extensive GA.
New-generation medical and surgical approaches, including subthreshold laser photocoagulation, may have some success in downstaging AMD.
To describe morphologic and visual outcomes in eyes with angiographic cystoid macular edema (CME) treated with ranibizumab or bevacizumab for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
Prospective cohort study within a randomized clinical trial.
A total of 1185 CATT study subjects.
Baseline fluorescein angiography (FA) images of all CATT study eyes were evaluated for CME. Grading of other characteristics on optical coherence tomography (OCT) and photographic images at baseline and during 2-year follow-up was completed by readers at the CATT Reading Centers. Three groups were created on the basis of baseline CME and intraretinal fluid (IRF) status: (1) CME, (2) IRF without CME, (3) neither CME nor IRF.
Visual acuity (VA) and total central retinal thickness (CRT) on OCT at baseline, year 1, and year 2.
Among 1131 participants with images of sufficient quality for determining CME and IRF at baseline, 92 (8.1%) had CME, 766 (67.7%) had IRF without CME, and 273 (24.1%) had neither. At baseline, eyes with CME had worse mean VA (letters) than eyes with IRF without CME and eyes with neither CME nor IRF (52 vs. 60 vs. 66 letters, P < 0.001); higher mean total CRT (μm) on OCT (514 vs. 472 vs. 404, P < 0.001); and greater hemorrhage, retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) lesions, and classic choroidal neovascularization (CNV). All groups showed improvement in VA at follow-up; however, the CME group started and ended with the worst VA among the 3 groups. Central retinal thickness, although higher at baseline for the CME group, was similar at 1 and 2 years follow-up for all groups. More eyes with CME (65.3%) developed scarring during 2 years of follow-up compared with eyes with IRF without CME (43.8%) and eyes with neither CME nor IRF (32.5%; P < 0.001).
In CATT, eyes with CME had worse baseline and follow-up VA, although all groups showed similar rates of improvement in VA during 2 years of follow-up. Cystoid macular edema seems to be a marker for poorer visual outcomes in nAMD because of underlying baseline retinal dysfunction and subsequent scarring.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) causes a significant proportion of visual loss in the developed world. Currently, little is known about its pathogenesis, and treatment options are limited. Dietary intake is one of the few modifiable risk factors for this condition. The best-validated therapies remain oral antioxidant supplements based on those investigated in the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) and the recently completed Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2). In this review, current dietary guidelines related to AMD, along with the underlying evidence to support them, are presented in conjunction with current treatment recommendations. Both AREDS and AREDS2 are discussed, as are avenues for further research, including supplementation with vitamin D and saffron. Despite the considerable disease burden of atrophic AMD, few effective therapies are available to treat it, and further research is required. 
The disease perception of the patients treated with intravitreal injections of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor due to wet age-related macular degeneration was investigated.
177 questionnaires focusing on the development of the perceived visual acuity and the quality of life were evaluated. The subgroup 1 included 125 patients (70.6%) with a unilateral wet age-related macular degeneration. The subgroup 2 included 52 patients (29.4%) with a bilateral wet age-related macular degeneration.
Patients would almost always recommend the therapy to a friend (97.2%). The critical remarks are related to the uncertain course of the disease (22.8%) and the uncertain duration of the treatment (19%). There was a discrepancy between the measured visual outcome and the perceived one in 5.6% in the subgroup 1, and in 38.5% in the subgroup 2. This difference was statistically significant (chi-square test with p<0.01).
The treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration with intravitreal injections of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor is judged positively. Binocular affected patients have a higher disease perception and therefore a poorer self-assessment of their visual acuity and their quality of life compared with monocular affected patients.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible blindness in older individuals. Our study aims to identify the key genes and upstream regulators in AMD.
To screen pathogenic genes of AMD, an integrated analysis was performed by using the microarray datasets in AMD derived from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The functional annotation and potential pathways of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were further discovered by Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis. We constructed the AMD-specific transcriptional regulatory network to find the crucial transcriptional factors (TFs) which target the DEGs in AMD. Quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed to verify the DEGs and TFs obtained by integrated analysis.
From two GEO datasets obtained, we identified 1280 DEGs (730 up-regulated and 550 down-regulated genes) between AMD and normal control (NC). After KEGG analysis, steroid biosynthesis is a significantly enriched pathway for DEGs. The expression of 8 genes (TNC, GRP, TRAF6, ADAMTS5, GPX3, FAP, DHCR7 and FDFT1) was detected. Except for TNC and GPX3, the other 6 genes in qRT-PCR played the same pattern with that in our integrated analysis.
The dysregulation of these eight genes may involve with the process of AMD. Two crucial transcription factors (c-rel and myogenin) were concluded to play a role in AMD. Especially, myogenin was associated with AMD by regulating TNC, GRP and FAP. Our finding can contribute to developing new potential biomarkers, revealing the underlying pathogenesis, and further raising new therapeutic targets for AMD.
To investigate the association between the type of neovascularization (NV) and the clinical characteristics of nonneovascular fellow eyes in patients with unilateral, neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Eighty-three patients with treatment-naive, unilateral, neovascular age-related macular degeneration were retrospectively analyzed. Neovascular lesions were classified using both fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography as Type 1 (subretinal pigment epithelium), 2 (subretinal), 3 (intraretinal), or mixed NV. The associations between NV lesion type and baseline clinical and imaging characteristics of the fellow eye, including central geographic atrophy, noncentral geographic atrophy, pigmentary changes, soft drusen, cuticular drusen, reticular pseudodrusen, and subfoveal choroidal thickness, were examined. Subfoveal choroidal thickness was defined as thin if thickness was <120 μm.
In the fellow eyes of patients with treatment-naive, unilateral, neovascular age-related macular degeneration, Type 3 NV had an increased adjusted odds ratio of reticular pseudodrusen (15.361, P < 0.001) and thin subfoveal choroidal thickness (21.537, P < 0.001) as well as a tendency toward an increased adjusted odds ratio of central geographic atrophy (4.775, P = 0.028). Fellow eyes of patients with Type 1 NV showed a decreased adjusted odds ratio of reticular pseudodrusen (0.233, P = 0.007) and thin subfoveal choroidal thickness (0.080, P = 0.005).
In patients with unilateral, neovascular age-related macular degeneration, certain nonneovascular features of the fellow eye correlate with the NV lesion composition based on type, as anatomically classified utilizing both fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography. Patients with Type 3 NV were more likely to have reticular pseudodrusen and/or thin subfoveal choroidal thickness in the fellow eye compared with those with Type 1 NV. Patients with Type 3 NV also showed a trend toward increased central geographic atrophy in the fellow eye.
In neovascular age related macular degeneration (nAMD), gene therapy to chronically express anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) proteins could ameliorate the treatment burden of chronic intravitreal therapy and improve limited visual outcomes associated with 'real world' undertreatment. Areas covered: In this review, the authors assess the evolution of gene therapy for AMD. Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors can transduce retinal pigment epithelium; one such early application was a phase I trial of AAV2-delivered pigment epithelium derived factor gene in advanced nAMD. Subsequently, gene therapy for AMD shifted to the investigation of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFLT-1), an endogenously expressed VEGF inhibitor, binding and neutralizing VEGF-A. After some disappointing results, research has centered on novel vectors, including optimized AAV2, AAV8 and lentivirus, as well as genes encoding other anti-angiogenic proteins, including ranibizumab, aflibercept, angiostatin and endostatin. Also, gene therapy targeting the complement system is being investigated for geographic atrophy due to non-neovascular AMD. Expert opinion: The success of gene therapy for AMD will depend on the selection of the most appropriate therapeutic protein and its level of chronic expression. Future investigations will center on optimizing vector, promoter and delivery methods, and evaluating the risks of the chronic expression of anti-angiogenic or anti-complement proteins.
<b>Background:</b> The relation between α-linolenic acid (ALA), a plant-derived omega-3 (n-3) fatty acid, and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is unclear. European researchers reported that ≤40% of ALA can be present as <i>trans</i> forms.<b>Objective:</b> We aimed to evaluate the associations between intake of ALA and intermediate and advanced AMD.<b>Design:</b> Seventy-five thousand eight hundred eighty-nine women from the Nurses' Health Study and 38,961 men from Health Professionals Follow-Up Study were followed up from 1984 to 2012 and from 1986 to 2010, respectively. We assessed dietary intake by a validated food-frequency questionnaire at baseline and every 4 y thereafter. One thousand five hundred eighty-nine incident intermediate and 1356 advanced AMD cases (primarily neovascular AMD) were confirmed by medical record review.<b>Results:</b> The multivariable-adjusted HR for intermediate AMD comparing ALA intake at the top quintile to the bottom quintile was 1.28 (95% CI: 1.05, 1.56; <i>P</i>-trend = 0.01) in the analyses combining 2 cohorts. The HR in each cohort was in the positive direction but reached statistical significance only in the women. However, the positive association was apparent only in the pre-2002 era in each cohort and not afterward (<i>P</i>-time interaction = 0.003). ALA intake was not associated with advanced AMD in either time period. Using gas-liquid chromatography, we identified both <i>cis</i> ALA (mean ± SD: 0.13% ± 0.04%) and <i>trans</i> ALA isomers (0.05% ± 0.01%) in 395 erythrocyte samples collected in 1989-1990. In stepwise regression models, mayonnaise was the leading predictor of erythrocyte concentrations of <i>cis</i> ALA and one isomer of <i>trans</i> ALA. We also found <i>trans</i> ALA in mayonnaise samples.<b>Conclusions:</b> A high intake of ALA was associated with an increased risk of intermediate AMD before 2002 but not afterward. The period before 2002 coincides with the same time period when <i>trans</i> ALA was found in food and participants' blood; this finding deserves further study.
To evaluate the effect of intravitreal bevacizumab on the macular choroidal volume and the subfoveal choroidal thickness in treatment naïve eyes with exudative age-related macular degeneration.
The macular choroidal volume and the subfoveal choroidal thickness were measured using enhanced depth imaging optical coherence tomography. After a screening examination, each patient received 3 monthly intravitreal injections of 1.25 mg bevacizumab. One month after the third injection was a final assessment.
Forty-seven patients with a mean age of 80 ± 6.4 years were included. The macular choroidal volume decreased significantly from median 4.1 mm (interquartile range 3.4-5.9) to median 3.9 mm (interquartile range 3.1-5.6) between the baseline and final examination (difference -0.46 mm, 95% confidence interval: -0.57 to 0.35, P < 0.001). Similarly, subfoveal choroidal thickness had decreased from 157.0 μm (interquartile range 116.0-244.5) at baseline to 139.0 μm (interquartile range 102.5-212.0) at the final examination (P < 0.001). Both parameters macular choroidal volume at baseline and subfoveal choroidal thickness at baseline were not associated with the response to treatment.
The macular choroidal volume and the subfoveal choroidal thickness decreased significantly after 3 monthly bevacizumab injections for exudative age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a major cause of central vision loss in persons over 55years of age in developed countries. AMD is a complex disease in which genetic, environmental and inflammatory factors influence its onset and progression. Elevation in serum anti-retinal autoantibodies, plasma and local activation of complement proteins of the alternative pathway, and increase in secretion of proinflammatory cytokines have been seen over the course of disease. Genetic studies of AMD patients confirmed that genetic variants affecting the alternative complement pathway have a major influence on AMD risk. Because the heterogeneity of this disease, there is no sufficient strategy to identify the disease onset and progression sole based eye examination, thus identification of reliable serological biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis and response to treatment by sampling patient's blood is necessary. This review provides an outline of the current knowledge on possible serological (autoantibodies, complement factors, cytokines, chemokines) and related genetic biomarkers relevant to the pathology of AMD, and discusses their application for prediction of disease activity and prognosis in AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is an eye disease underlined by the degradation of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells, photoreceptors, and choriocapillares, but the exact mechanism of cell death in AMD is not completely clear. This mechanism is important for prevention of and therapeutic intervention in AMD, which is a hardly curable disease. Present reports suggest that both apoptosis and pyroptosis (cell death dependent on caspase-1) as well as necroptosis (regulated necrosis dependent on the proteins RIPK3 and MLKL, caspase-independent) can be involved in the AMD-related death of RPE cells. Autophagy, a cellular clearing system, plays an important role in AMD pathogenesis, and this role is closely associated with the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome, a central event for advanced AMD. Autophagy can play a role in apoptosis, pyroptosis, and necroptosis, but its contribution to AMD-specific cell death is not completely clear. Autophagy can be involved in the regulation of proteins important for cellular antioxidative defense, including Nrf2, which can interact with p62/SQSTM, a protein essential for autophagy. As oxidative stress is implicated in AMD pathogenesis, autophagy can contribute to this disease by deregulation of cellular defense against the stress. However, these and other interactions do not explain the mechanisms of RPE cell death in AMD. In this review, we present basic mechanisms of autophagy and its involvement in AMD pathogenesis and try to show a regulatory role of autophagy in RPE cell death. This can result in considering the genes and proteins of autophagy as molecular targets in AMD prevention and therapy.
Oxidative stress belongs to the main factors of pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration, characterized by the damage to the retinal pigment epithelium cells and photoreceptors. Retinal pigment epithelium cells are rich in mitochondria, producing large amount of reactive oxygen species, which are by-products of the activity of the respiratory chain. The distribution in the activity of the chain may be evoked by the release of cytochrome C from the mitochondrion to the cytoplasm. This process may activated by nuclear respiratory factor 2, Nrf2, which is encoded by a highly polymorphic gene. In this study we examined the association between age-related macular degeneration risk and the 25129A > C polymorphism of the gene encoding nuclear respiratory factor 2 (rs12594956).
Genotypes were determined in DNA from peripheral blood lymphocytes of 281 patients with age-related macular degeneration (181 with wet form of the disease and 101 with its dry form), and 105 controls by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism.
A weak association (OR 1.96; p = 0.023) between the C/C genotype of the 25129A > C polymorphism and the occurrence of age-related macular degeneration was found. A stronger association was observed between dry age-related macular degeneration occurrence and the C/C genotype of the polymorphism (OR 2.23; p = 0.018). The A/C genotype decreased the risk of age-related macular degeneration and its dry form (OR 0.51; p = 0.023 and 0.44; p = 0.018, respectively). Potential risk factors such as age, gender, smoking habit, living environment (rural or urban) and family status of age-related macular degeneration increased the risk of AMD associated with the C/C genotype (OR 2.52; p = 0.012).
The 25129A > C polymorphism of the NRF2 gene may be associated with age-related macular degeneration. mitochondria, reactive oxygen species, gene polymorphism, NRF2 gene, age-related macular degeneration - AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of visual impairment. It is characterised by damage to a tissue complex composed of the retinal pigment epithelium, Bruch's membrane and choriocapillaris. In early AMD extracellular debris including drusen accumulates in Bruch's membrane and then in late AMD geographic atrophy and/or neovascularisation develop. Variants in genes encoding components of the alternative pathway of the complement cascade have a major influence on AMD risk, especially at the RCA locus on chromosome 1, which contains CFH and the CFHR genes. Immunohistochemical studies have demonstrated complement components in unaffected and AMD macular tissue. Whilst other factors, including oxidative stress, play important roles in AMD pathogenesis, evidence for the central role played by complement dysregulation is discussed in this review. 
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of irreversible central vision loss in the elderly. Genetic factors contributing to AMD include single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in immune-related genes including CFH, C2, CFI, C9, and C3, thus implicating these pathways in AMD pathogenesis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are powerful regulators of gene expression and execute this function by binding to the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of target mRNAs, leading to mRNA degradation. In this study, we searched for the possible association of SNPs in the 3'UTR region of IL-17A, a gene implicated in AMD pathogenesis without any previous SNP association with AMD. Using two independent sample cohorts of Caucasian subjects, six SNPs in the IL-17A 3'-UTR were selected for genotyping based on bioinformatic predictions of the SNP effect on microRNA binding. The SNP rs7747909 was found to be associated with AMD (P < 0.05) in the NEI cohort, using a dominant model logistic regression. Luciferase reporter gene assays and RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed using ARPE-19 cells to confirm the preferential binding of microRNAs to the major allele of the SNP. Our findings support the hypothesis that microRNA-mediated gene dysregulation may play a role in the pathogenesis of AMD.
To evaluate prospectively the efficacy and safety of a fixed bimonthly ranibizumab treatment regimen (RABIMO) in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) and to compare these results with a pro re nata (PRN) treatment scheme.
This was a 12-month, phase IV, single center, randomised, non-inferiority study. Following three initial monthly injections, patients were randomised to receive either ranibizumab bimonthly (RABIMO group) or ranibizumab PRN (PRN group) (n = 20 each). Main outcome measures were best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central retinal thickness (CRT), number of injections, and adverse events (AEs).
BCVA [median (interquartile range, IQR)] increased significantly in both groups after 12 months [RABIMO group +8.5 (14); PRN group +6.5 (16) ETDRS letters] when compared to baseline (p < 0.0001; p = 0.0085). At month 12, the RABIMO treatment regimen was non-inferior to the PRN scheme (∆BCVA = 3.5 ETDRS letters; p < 0.0001). CRT was significantly reduced in both groups after the 12-month study period (p < 0.0001 each), with no significant difference between groups (p = 0.6772). Number of overall injections [median (IQR)] was 8 (0) in the RABIMO versus 4 (5) in the PRN group (p = 0.0037). Three patients in the RABIMO group received one additional unscheduled injection. We observed no significant differences between groups in the number of patients with reported SAEs/AEs (RABIMO group n = 6/15; PRN group n = 7/13) (p = 0.7357/p = 0.4902).
We found no evidence of significant functional or anatomical differences between the RABIMO and PRN treatment regimens. However, the RABIMO group's number of injections was twice as high as the PRN group's (protocol-driven). In light of potential side effects, the fixed bimonthly treatment regimen might not be advisable for routine clinical care, but it might be a worthwhile treatment option if monthly monitoring is not possible. Eudra-CT number: 2009-017324-11.
To investigate the response of carotenoid supplementation in different phenotypes of early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) by measuring macular pigment optical density (MPOD) and retinal sensitivity.
Consecutive patients with only medium/large drusen and only reticular pseudodrusen (RPD) and age-matched and sex-matched controls were enrolled. At baseline, participants underwent a complete ophthalmological examination including measurement of best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), MPOD and retinal sensitivity. Patients were put on vitamin supplementation (lutein 10 mg/day, zeaxanthin 2 mg/day) and 3 months later underwent a repeated ophthalmological examination.
Twenty patients with medium/large drusen, 19 with RPD and 15 control subjects were included. At baseline, in controls, mean MPOD and BCVA were significantly higher compared with RPD (p=0.001 and p=0.01) but similar to medium/large drusen (p=0.9 and p=0.4). Mean retinal sensitivity was significantly higher in controls compared with RPD and medium/large drusen (for all p<0.0001). After 3 months of carotenoid supplementation the mean MPOD significantly increased in RPD (p=0.002), thus showing no more difference compared with controls (p=0.3); no significant changes were found in mean retinal sensitivity and BCVA (p=0.3 and p=0.7). Medium/large drusen did not show significant changes on MPOD, retinal sensitivity and BCVA (p=0.5, p=0.7 and p=0.7, respectively).
Patients with early AMD, especially RPD phenotype, show lower macular sensitivity and MPOD than controls. After supplementation, MPOD significantly increased in RPD. These results suggest different pathophysiology for RPD as compared with medium/large drusen and may open new ways to identifying further therapeutic targets in this phenotype of early AMD.
To study the benefit of intravitreal dexamethasone implant in the management of neovascular age-related macular degeneration resistant to bevacizumab and ranibizumab.
Patients with persistent macular fluid on optical coherence tomography despite monthly treatment with at least three consecutive bevacizumab injections followed by at least three ranibizumab injections were prospectively enrolled. A single dexamethasone implant was administered followed by intravitreal ranibizumab 1 week later. Ranibizumab was continued afterward on an as-needed basis. Main outcomes were improvement in central retinal thickness and best-corrected visual acuity.
Nineteen patients (19 eyes) were enrolled. There was no significant change in best-corrected visual acuity over 6 months. Greatest reduction in mean central retinal thickness, from 295.2 μm to 236.2 μm, occurred 1 month after dexamethasone implant (P < 0.0001). By Month 6, mean central retinal thickness was 287.3 μm (P = 0.16). Eyes with only intraretinal fluid (13 eyes) achieved a fluid-free macula. Eyes with predominantly subretinal fluid (6 eyes) did not improve central retinal thickness and continued monthly ranibizumab. Mean baseline intraocular pressure was 13.2 mmHg, which peaked at 15.6 mmHg by Month 2 (P = 0.004).
Intravitreal dexamethasone implant improved only macular intraretinal fluid in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration resistant to bevacizumab and ranibizumab. However, this treatment had a limited duration.
<b>Aims:</b> The purpose of this study was to analyze the prevalence of depression, anxiety, adjustment disorders, and somatoform disorders in patients diagnosed with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in Germany. <b>Methods:</b> This study included 7,580 patients between the ages of 40 and 90 diagnosed with AMD between January 2011 and December 2014 in 1,072 primary care practices (index date). The last follow-up was in July 2016. We also included 7,580 controls without AMD, which were matched (1:1) to the AMD cases by age, sex, type of health insurance (private or statutory), physician, and Charlson comorbidity score as a generic marker of comorbidity. The outcome of the study was the prevalence of depression, anxiety, adjustment disorders, and somatoform disorders recorded in the database between the index date and the end of follow-up. <b>Results:</b> The mean age among subjects was 75.7 years (SD=10.1 years), 34.0% were men, and 7.8% had private health insurance coverage. The Charlson comorbidity index was 2.0 (SD=1.8). Depression was the most frequent disease (33.7% in AMD patients versus 27.3% in controls), followed by somatoform disorders (19.6% and 16.7%), adjustment disorders (14.8% and 10.5%), and anxiety disorders (11.7% and 8.2%). Depression (OR=1.37, 95% CI: 1.27-1.47), anxiety (OR=1.50, 95% CI: 1.35-1.67), adjustment disorders (OR=1.50, 95% CI: 1.36-1.65), and somatoform disorders (OR=1.22, 95% CI: 1.12-1.32) were all positively associated with AMD. <b>Conclusion:</b> Overall, a significant association was found between AMD and depression, anxiety, adjustment disorders, and somatoform disorders.
Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) is a noninvasive imaging technology that provides information on the distribution of lipofuscin within the retinal pigment epithelial cells. Progressive accumulation of lipofuscin within retinal pigment epithelial cells is involved in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Fundus autofluorescence imaging using a confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope is a useful technique to identify high-risk characteristics in patients with nonexudative AMD. It gives also some valuable knowledge and clues in differantial diagnosis of exudative age-related macular degeneration. This review comprises an introduction to fundus autofluorescence, a review of FAF imaging in AMD, and the recent classification of geographic atrophy (GA) and early AMD phenotypes by the Fundus Autofluorescence in Age-related Macular Degeneration Study. The association of phenotype and atrophy progression and choroidal neovascularization development are also summarized.
Fibulin-3 (F3) is a secreted, disulfide-rich glycoprotein which is expressed in a variety of tissues within the body, including the retina. An Arg345Trp (R345W) mutation in F3 was identified as the cause of a rare retinal dystrophy, Malattia Leventinese/Doyne Honeycomb Retinal Dystrophy (ML/DHRD). ML/DHRD shares many phenotypic similarities with age-related macular degeneration (AMD). The most prominent feature of ML/DHRD is the development of radial or honeycomb patterns of drusen which can develop as early as adolescence. Two independent mouse models of ML/DHRD show evidence of complement activation as well as retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) atrophy, strengthening the phenotypic connection with AMD. Because of its similarities with AMD, ML/DHRD is receiving increasing interest as a potential surrogate disease to study the underpinnings of AMD. This mini-review summarizes the current knowledge of F3 and points toward potential therapeutic strategies which directly or indirectly target cellular dysfunction associated with R345W F3. 
Macrophages were previously implicated in the pathogenesis of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nvAMD). It is unclear if a specific macrophage phenotype is associated with nvAMD, and if macrophages from nvAMD patients are more pathogenic as compared with controls. To address these issues, we evaluated macrophages derived from peripheral blood monocytes of nvAMD patients and age-matched controls. Macrophages were assessed in terms of their expression profile and of their angiogenic potential in the choroid sprouting assay and the rat model of laser-induced choroidal neovascularization. Results showed a proangiogenic and inflammatory gene and protein expression profiles in classic (M[IFNγ and LPS]) and alternative (M[IL-4 and IL-13]) polarized macrophages. Furthermore, activated macrophages, particularly of the M(IFNγ and LPS) phenotype from nvAMD patients, were proangiogenic ex vivo and in vivo. These findings implicate activated human macrophages, particularly M(IFNγ and LPS) macrophages from nvAMD patients, in nvAMD. Further research is required to determine whether activated macrophages can serve as therapeutic targets in nvAMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of visual loss among the elderly. A key cell type involved in AMD, the retinal pigment epithelium, expresses a G protein-coupled receptor that, in response to its ligand, L-DOPA, up-regulates pigment epithelia-derived factor, while down-regulating vascular endothelial growth factor. In this study we investigated the potential relationship between L-DOPA and AMD.
We used retrospective analysis to compare the incidence of AMD between patients taking vs not taking L-DOPA. We analyzed 2 separate cohorts of patients with extensive medical records from the Marshfield Clinic (approximately 17,000 and approximately 20,000) and the Truven MarketScan outpatient and databases (approximately 87 million) patients. We used International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision codes to identify AMD diagnoses and L-DOPA prescriptions to determine the relative risk of developing AMD and age of onset with or without an L-DOPA prescription.
In the retrospective analysis of patients without an L-DOPA prescription, AMD age of onset was 71.2, 71.3, and 71.3 in 3 independent retrospective cohorts. Age-related macular degeneration occurred significantly later in patients with an L-DOPA prescription, 79.4 in all cohorts. The odds ratio of developing AMD was also significantly negatively correlated by L-DOPA (odds ratio 0.78; confidence interval, 0.76-0.80; P <.001). Similar results were observed for neovascular AMD (P <.001).
Exogenous L-DOPA was protective against AMD. L-DOPA is normally produced in pigmented tissues, such as the retinal pigment epithelium, as a byproduct of melanin synthesis by tyrosinase. GPR143 is the only known L-DOPA receptor; it is therefore plausible that GPR143 may be a fruitful target to combat this devastating disease.
To evaluate aqueous flare levels following intravitreal ranibizumab injection for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
In total, 81 eyes of 79 patients who underwent intravitreal ranibizumab injection for neovascular AMD were included. Aqueous flare was evaluated before pupillary dilatation with Kowa FM-600 laser flare meter at baseline, and 1 day, and 1 month after intravitreal administration of ranibizumab 0.5 mg (0.05 mL).
The mean anterior chamber flare was 10.7 ± 6.8 (range: 1.5-35.4) ph/ms before the injection, 12.5 ± 8.9 (range: 0.3-43) ph/ms on the first day, and 9.9 ± 5.7 (range: 0.2-28.4) ph/ms in the first month. On the first day, a subtle increasing of flare was observed. However, the difference between the mean aqueous flare levels at baseline and postoperative first day and first month was not statistically different (p>0.05).
No significant short-term intraocular inflammation was noted in these eyes receiving ranibizumab for the treatment of neovascular AMD.
To evaluate a modified treat-and-extend (TAE) regimen of intravitreal aflibercept injection (IAI) for treatment-naïve patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Thirty-six eyes (36 patients) treated with the modified TAE regimen were evaluated at 12 months retrospectively. The modified TAE regimen consisted of three steps: 1) an induction phase, during which patients were treated with ≥ 3-monthly IAIs until exudative activity disappeared, 2) an observation phase, during which patients were monitored until exudative activity appeared, and 3) a TAE phase, for which the initial treatment interval was determined based on the disease recurrence interval, followed by treatment intervals changing by 2 weeks.
Mean logMAR BCVA improved significantly from 0.48 ± 0.51 at baseline to 0.40 ± 0.53 at 12 months (P < 0.01), and was maintained (losing <0.3 logMAR units) in 35 eyes (97.2 %). Mean central retinal thickness and central choroidal thickness decreased significantly after 12 months. In the TAE phase, the distribution of treatment intervals was ≥8 weeks in 64.7 % (11 eyes) at 12 months. The mean number of injections was 4.53.
A modified TAE regimen of IAI for neovascular AMD produced good functional outcomes over 12 months with the small number of injections.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a prevalent blinding disease, accounting for roughly 50 % of blindness in developed nations. Very significant advances have been made in terms of discovering genetic susceptibilities to AMD as well as dietary risk factors. To date, nutritional supplementation is the only available treatment option for the dry form of the disease known to slow progression of AMD. Despite an excellent understanding of genes and nutrition in AMD, there is remarkably little known about gene-diet interactions that may identify efficacious approaches to treat individuals. This review will summarize our current understanding of gene-diet interactions in AMD with a focus on animal models and human epidemiological studies. 
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a progressive retinal disease and the major cause of irreversible vision loss in the elderly. Numerous studies have found both common and rare genetic variants in the complement pathway to play a role in the pathogenesis of AMD. In this review we provide an overview of rare variants identified in AMD patients, and summarize the functional consequences of rare genetic variation in complement genes on the complement system. Finally, we discuss the relevance of this work in light of ongoing clinical trials that study the effectiveness of complement inhibitors against AMD.
Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of blindness among the elderly in western societies. While antioxidant micronutrient treatment is available for intermediate non-neovascular disease, and effective anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment is available for neovascular disease, treatment for early AMD is lacking due to an incomplete understanding of the early molecular events. The role of lipids, which accumulate in the macula, and their oxidation, has emerged as an important factor in disease development. These oxidized lipids can either directly contribute to tissue injury or react with amine on proteins to form oxidation-specific epitopes, which can induce an innate immune response. If inadequately neutralized, the inflammatory response from these epitopes can incite tissue injury during disease development. This review explores how the accumulation of lipids, their oxidation, and the ensuing inflammatory response might contribute to the pathogenesis of AMD. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Lipid modification and lipid peroxidation products in innate immunity and inflammation edited by Christoph J. Binder .
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of vision loss and blindness among the elderly. Although the pathogenesis of this disease remains still obscure, several researchers have report that death of retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) caused by excessive accumulation of A2E is crucial determinants of AMD. In this study, the preventive effect of Vaccinium uliginosum L. (V.U) extract and its fractions on AMD was investigated in blue light-irradiated human RPE cell (ARPE-19 cells). Blue light-induced RPE cell death was significantly inhibited by the treatment of V.U extract or its fraction. To identify the mechanism, FAB-MS analysis revealed that V.U inhibits the photooxidation of N-retinyl-N-retinylidene ethanolamine (A2E) induced by blue light in cell free system. Moreover, monitoring by quantitative HPLC also revealed that V.U extract and its fractions reduced intracellular accumulation of A2E, suggesting that V.U extract and its fractions inhibit not only blue light-induced photooxidation, but also intracellular accumulation of A2E, resulting in RPE cell survival after blue light exposure. A2E-laden cell exposed to blue light induced apoptosis by increasing the cleaved form of caspase-3, Bax/Bcl-2. Additionally, V.U inhibited by the treatment of V.U extract or quercetin-3-O-arabinofuranoside. These results suggest that V.U extract and its fractions have preventive effect on blue light-induced damage in RPE cells and AMD. 
We discuss how an imperfect visual cycle results in the formation of vitamin A dimers, thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of various retinal diseases, and summarize how slowing vitamin A dimerization has been a therapeutic target of interest to prevent blindness. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of vitamin A dimerization, an alternative form of vitamin A, one that forms dimers more slowly yet maneuvers effortlessly through the visual cycle, was developed. Such a vitamin A, reinforced with deuterium (C20-D3-vitamin A), can be used as a non-disruptive tool to understand the contribution of vitamin A dimers to vision loss. Eventually, C20-D3-vitamin A could become a disease-modifying therapy to slow or stop vision loss associated with dry age-related macular degeneration (AMD), Stargardt disease and retinal diseases marked by such vitamin A dimers. Human clinical trials of C20-D3-vitamin A (ALK-001) are underway. 
We evaluated the influence of an antioxidant and zinc nutritional supplement [the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) formulation] on delaying or preventing progression to neovascular AMD (NV) in persons with age-related macular degeneration (AMD). AREDS subjects (<i>n</i> = 802) with category 3 or 4 AMD at baseline who had been treated with placebo or the AREDS formulation were evaluated for differences in the risk of progression to NV as a function of <i>complement factor H</i> (<i>CFH</i>) and <i>age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2</i> (<i>ARMS2</i>) genotype groups. We used published genetic grouping: a two-SNP haplotype risk-calling algorithm to assess <i>CFH</i>, and either the single SNP rs10490924 or 372_815del443ins54 to mark <i>ARMS2</i> risk. Progression risk was determined using the Cox proportional hazard model. Genetics-treatment interaction on NV risk was assessed using a multiiterative bootstrap validation analysis. We identified strong interaction of genetics with AREDS formulation treatment on the development of NV. Individuals with high <i>CFH</i> and no <i>ARMS2</i> risk alleles and taking the AREDS formulation had increased progression to NV compared with placebo. Those with low <i>CFH</i> risk and high <i>ARMS2</i> risk had decreased progression risk. Analysis of <i>CFH</i> and <i>ARMS2</i> genotype groups from a validation dataset reinforces this conclusion. Bootstrapping analysis confirms the presence of a genetics-treatment interaction and suggests that individual treatment response to the AREDS formulation is largely determined by genetics. The AREDS formulation modifies the risk of progression to NV based on individual genetics. Its use should be based on patient-specific genotype.
To describe the effects of treatment for 1 year with ranibizumab or bevacizumab on macular morphology and the association of macular morphology with visual acuity (VA) in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Prospective cohort study within a randomized clinical trial.
Participants in the Comparison of Age-related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials.
Participants were assigned randomly to treatment with ranibizumab or bevacizumab on a monthly or as-needed schedule. Optical coherence tomography (OCT), fluorescein angiography (FA), color fundus photography (FP), and VA testing were performed periodically throughout 52 weeks. Masked readers graded images. General linear models were applied to evaluate effects of time and treatment on outcomes.
Fluid type and location and thickness by OCT, size, and lesion composition on FP, FA, and VA.
Intraretinal fluid (IRF), subretinal fluid (SRF), subretinal pigment epithelium fluid, and retinal, subretinal, and subretinal tissue complex thickness decreased in all treatment groups. A higher proportion of eyes treated monthly with ranibizumab had fluid resolution at 4 weeks, and the difference persisted through 52 weeks. At 52 weeks, there was little association between the presence of fluid of any type (without regard to fluid location) and the mean VA. However, at all time points, eyes with residual IRF, especially foveal IRF, had worse mean VA (9 letters) than those without IRF. Eyes with abnormally thin (<120 μm) or thick (>212 μm) retinas had worse VA than those with normal thickness (120-212 μm). At week 52, eyes with larger neovascular lesions or with foveal scar had worse VA than eyes without these features.
Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy reduced lesion activity and improved VA in all treatment groups. At all time points, eyes with residual IRF had worse VA than those without. Eyes with abnormally thin or thick retinas, residual large lesions, and scar also had worse VA. Monthly ranibizumab dosing yielded more eyes with no fluid and an abnormally thin retina, although the long-term significance is unknown. These results have important treatment implications in eyes undergoing anti-VEGF therapy for neovascular AMD.
Proprietary or commercial disclosure may be found after the references.
Age-related macular degeneration is the leading cause of irreversible visual impairment and disability among the elderly in developed countries. There is compelling evidence that atherosclerosis and age-related macular degeneration share a similar pathogenic process. The association between atherosclerosis and age-related macular degeneration has been inferred from histological, biochemical and epidemiological studies. Many published data indicate that drusen are similar in molecular composition to plaques in atherosclerosis. Furthermore, a great body of evidence has emerged over the past decade that implicates the chronic inflammatory processes in the pathogenesis and progression of both disorders. We speculate that vascular atherosclerosis and age-related macular degeneration may represent different manifestations of the same disease induced by a pathologic tissue response to the damage caused by oxidative stress and local ischemia. In this review, we characterise in detail a strong association between age-related macular degeneration and atherosclerosis development, and we postulate the hypothesis that age-related macular degeneration is a local manifestation of a systemic disease. This provides a new approach for understanding the aspects of pathogenesis and might improve the prevention and treatment of both diseases which both result from ageing of the human body.
To study the prevalence, tomographic features, and clinical characteristics of focal choroidal excavation (FCE) in eyes with exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
We examined 243 consecutive eyes with exudative AMD with a prototype swept-source optical coherence tomography (OCT) system. Three-dimensional images of the macular area, covering 6 × 6 mm(2), were reconstructed by segmentation of the outer surface of the retinal pigment epithelium.
Three-dimensional swept-source OCT revealed 15 excavations in 12 eyes (4.9%); 10 had a single excavation and 2 had multiple excavations (2 and 3 excavations, respectively). In multiaveraged scans, unusual choroidal tissue was found beneath 5 excavations, bridging the excavation with the outer choroidal boundary. Additionally, the suprachoroidal space was observed beneath 7 excavations-the outer choroidal boundary appeared to be pulled inward by this bridging tissue. In 9 excavations, color fundus photographs showed pigmentary disturbance. Fourteen excavations (93.3%) were located within or adjacent to the choroidal neovascularization area. Compared with eyes without FCE, in eyes with FCE, the mean age was significantly higher (P = 0.040) and mean visual acuity was significantly better (P = 0.014). In addition, polypoidal lesions were observed in 8 of 12 eyes with FCE, but they appeared to have a limited effect on either the rate of FCE (P = 0.44) or the clinical characteristics of the eyes.
While FCE may be partially related to the choroidal neovascularization associated with exudative AMD, other factors may also influence this association.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a major cause of blindness in older adults in developed countries. It is a multifactorial disease triggered by both environmental and genetic factors. High-temperature requirement A serine peptidase 1 (HTRA1) and age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 (ARMS2) are two genes that are strongly associated with AMD. Because ARMS2 is an evolutionarily recent primate-specific gene and because the ARMS2/HTRA1 genes are positioned at a locus on chromosome 10q26 in a region with strong linkage disequilibrium, it is difficult to distinguish the functions of the individual genes. Therefore, it is necessary to bring these genes into focus. Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) provides direct access to a patient's genetics and allows for the possibility of identifying the initiating events of RPE-associated degenerative diseases. In this paper, a review of recent epidemiological studies of AMD is offered. An argument for a definite correlation between the ARMS2 gene and AMD is presented. A summary of the use of ARMS2 genotyping for medical treatment is provided. Several ARMS2-related genetic models based on such stem cells as iPSCs are introduced. The possibility of applying gene-editing techniques and stem-cell techniques to better explore the mechanisms of the ARMS2 high-risk allele, which will lead to important guidance for treatment, is also discussed.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common condition of vision loss with disease development strongly influenced by environmental and genetic factors. Recently, 34 loci were associated with AMD at genome-wide significance. So far, little is known about a genetic overlap between AMD and other complex diseases or disease-relevant traits.
For each of 60 complex diseases/traits with publicly available genome-wide significant association data, the lead genetic variant per independent locus was extracted and a genetic score was calculated for each disease/trait as the weighted sum of risk alleles. The association with AMD was estimated based on 16,144 AMD cases and 17,832 controls using logistic regression.
Of the respective disease/trait variance, the 60 genetic scores explained on average 4.8% (0.27-20.69%) and 16 of them were found to be significantly associated with AMD (Q-values < 0.01, p values from < 1.0 × 10<sup>-16</sup> to 1.9 × 10<sup>-3</sup>). Notably, an increased risk for AMD was associated with reduced risk for cardiovascular diseases, increased risk for autoimmune diseases, higher HDL and lower LDL levels in serum, lower bone-mineral density as well as an increased risk for skin cancer. By restricting the analysis to 1824 variants initially used to compute the 60 genetic scores, we identified 28 novel AMD risk variants (Q-values < 0.01, p values from 1.1 × 10<sup>-7</sup> to 3.0 × 10<sup>-4</sup>), known to be involved in cardiovascular disorders, lipid metabolism, autoimmune diseases, anthropomorphic traits, ocular disorders, and neurological diseases. The latter variants represent 20 novel AMD-associated, pleiotropic loci. Genes in the novel loci reinforce previous findings strongly implicating the complement system in AMD pathogenesis.
We demonstrate a substantial overlap of the genetics of several complex diseases/traits with AMD and provide statistically significant evidence for an additional 20 loci associated with AMD. This highlights the possibility that so far unrelated pathologies may have disease pathways in common.
To compare rates of peripheral retinal changes in Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) participants with at least intermediate age-related macular degeneration (AMD) with control subjects without intermediate age-related changes (large drusen).
Cross-sectional evaluation of clinic-based patients enrolled in AREDS2 and a prospective study.
Participants from prospective studies.
The 200° pseudocolor and fundus autofluorescence (FAF) images were captured on the Optos 200 Tx Ultrawide-field device (Optos, Dunfermline, Scotland) by centering on the fovea and then steering superiorly and inferiorly. The montaged images were graded at a reading center with the images divided into 3 zones (zone 1 [posterior pole], zone 2 [midperiphery], and zone 3 [far periphery]) to document the presence of peripheral lesions.
Peripheral retinal lesions: drusen, hypopigmentary/hyperpigmentary changes, reticular pseudodrusen, senile reticular pigmentary changes, cobblestone degeneration, and FAF abnormalities.
A total of 484 (951 eyes) AREDS2 participants with AMD (cases) and 89 (163 eyes) controls without AMD had gradable color and FAF images. In zones 2 and 3, neovascularization and geographic atrophy (GA) were present, ranging from 0.4% to 6% in eyes of cases, respectively, and GA was present in 1% of eyes of controls. Drusen were detected in 97%, 78%, and 64% of eyes of cases and 48%, 21%, and 9% of eyes of controls in zones 2 and 3 superior and 3 inferior, respectively (P < 0.001 for all). Peripheral reticular pseudodrusen were seen in 15%. Senile reticular pigmentary change was the predominant peripheral change seen in 48% of cases and 16% of controls in zone 2 (P < 0.001). Nonreticular pigment changes were less frequent in the periphery than in the posterior pole (46% vs. 76%) and negligible in controls.
Peripheral retinal changes are more prevalent in eyes with AMD than in control eyes. Drusen are seen in a majority of eyes with AMD in both the mid and far periphery, whereas pigment changes and features of advanced AMD are less frequent. Age-related macular degeneration may be more than a "macular" condition but one that involves the entire retina. Future longitudinal studies of peripheral changes in AMD and their impact on visual function may contribute to understanding AMD pathogenesis.
Complement factor H (CFH) Y402H (rs1061170) and age-related maculopathy susceptibility2 (ARMS2)/LOC387715 A69S (rs10490924) polymorphisms shown to have significant association with age-related macular degeneration (AMD). In this meta-analysis, we pooled the results of the available association studies between combined ARMS2/LOC387715A69S-CFHY402H genotypes and AMD to estimate the possible synergistic or multiplicative effects.
Heterogeneity of studies was evaluated using the Cochran Q-test and the I-square index. To modify the heterogeneity in the variables, we used random effects model. Meta-analysis was performed using STATA. To estimate the additive or supra-additive effects, we calculated relative excess risk due to interaction (RERI), attributable proportion due to interaction (AP), synergy index (S), and multiplicative index (V).
We included eight studies with 2915 AMD patients and 3505 control subjects. Considering the GGTT genotypes as reference lines, the pooled AMD Odds Ratios for stratified combined genotypes were 2.32 (95% CI 1.64-3.28) for GGnon-TT, 2.49 (95% CI 1.72-3.60) for non-GGTT, and 7.82 (95% CI 5.09-12.00) for non-GGnon-TT. Pooled synergy analysis revealed RERI = 4.08 (95% CI 3.15-5.27), AP = 0.50 (95% CI 0.42-0.57), S = 2.31 (95% CI 1.9-2.82), and V = 1.21 (95% CI 0.93-1.49).
This analysis revealed the synergistic and positive multiplicative effect of these two genes indicating that there is a common pathway of ARMS2/LOC387715 and CFH in AMD pathogenesis which may be the complement system pathway.
To determine treatment outcomes in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration having visual acuity better than 20/40 after 1 years to 2 years of ranibizumab or bevacizumab therapy using a treat-and-extend regimen.
Retrospective observational case series. Clinical records were reviewed from patients with treatment-naive neovascular age-related macular degeneration and baseline best-corrected Snellen visual acuity >20/40 treated with intravitreal ranibizumab or bevacizumab for a minimum of 1 year using a treat-and-extend regimen. The primary outcome measures were change from initial visual acuity, proportion of eyes losing <3 best-corrected visual acuity lines, proportion of eyes maintaining visual acuity ≥20/40, change from baseline central retinal thickness, and mean number of injections after 1 years and 2 years of follow-up.
A total of 42 eyes from 40 patients were included. The mean follow-up period was 1.44 years. The mean initial logMAR visual acuity was 0.226, and remained stable at 0.257 and 0.267 after 1 years and 2 years of follow-up, respectively. At baseline, mean central retinal thickness was 305.8 μm, improved to 272.6 μm after 1 year of treatment (P < 0.001), and remained stable at 266.2 μm (P = 0.015) after 2 years. At 1-year follow-up period, 94.4% of eyes had lost less than 3 Snellen lines, and 94.1% of eyes lost less than 3 Snellen lines after 2 years. The percentage of eyes maintaining visual acuity ≥20/40 was 81% and 75% after each year. Eyes received on average 7.8 injections during the first year of treatment and 6.1 injections over the second year.
Eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration presenting with initial visual acuity better than 20/40 on average maintained vision, lost less than 3 lines of acuity, and achieved anatomical improvements using a treat-and-extend regimen over a 2-year period.
To clarify the efficacy of aflibercept for treating exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
We prospectively studied 47 eyes with AMD. Forty-seven patients (mean age 72.2 years) received three consecutive monthly intravitreal aflibercept injections followed by an injection every 2 months until 12 months. The primary outcome was the 12-month visual results compared with baseline; the secondary outcomes were the prevalence of geography atrophy (GA), a dry macula at month 12, and anatomic changes on optical coherence tomography.
The mean logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in 27 eyes with typical AMD and 20 eyes with polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) significantly (p < 0.0001, p < 0.05, respectively) improved from 0.60 to 0.32 at baseline to 0.29 and 0.21 at month 12. At month 12, 22 (81.5 %) eyes with typical AMD and 17 (85 %) eyes with PCV had dry macula. The subfoveal choroidal thicknesses in typical AMD and PCV decreased significantly (p < 0.0001 for both comparisons) from 241 ± 118 and 294 ± 76 μ at baseline to 198 ± 104 and 244 ± 84 μ at month 12. Progressing or new GA was seen in three eyes with typical AMD and one eye with PCV; the mean change in the BCVA was significantly (p = 0.0026) worse at month 12. No other complications developed.
Intravitreal aflibercept significantly improved VA and anatomic changes in typical AMD and PCV over 12 months. Development of GA might be a risk for declining VA.
To measure visual acuity and metamorphopsia in patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and to explore their relationship with macular lesions.
In this cross-sectional study, a total of 32 normal subjects (32 eyes) and 35 AMD patients (35 eyes) were recruited. They were categorized into 4 groups: normal, dry AMD, non-active wet AMD, and active wet AMD. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was measured using the Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study protocol. Metamorphopsia was quantified with the orientation discrimination threshold (ODT). Macular lesions, including drusen, sub-retinal fluid (SRF), intra-retinal fluid (IRF), pigmented epithelium detachment (PED), and scarring, were identified with spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). A linear regression model was established to identify the relationships between the functional and structural changes.
BCVA progressively worsened across the normal, dry AMD, non-active wet AMD, and active wet AMD groups (P < 0.001), and ODT increased across the groups (P < 0.001). The correlation between BCVA and ODT varied among the groups. The partial correlation between BCVA and ODT was -0.61 (P < 0.001). Linear regression showed that ODT significantly depended on IRF (β = 0.61, P < 0.001), SRF (β = 0.34, P = 0.003), and scarring (β = 0.26, P = 0.050), while BCVA significantly depended only on scarring (β = -0.52, P < 0.001), and IRF (β = -0.36, P = 0.016).
From dry AMD to active wet AMD, BCVA gradually worsened while ODT increased. The correlation between BCVA and ODT varied among these groups, indicating that AMD lesions affect them differently. ODT and BCVA should be used concurrently for better monitoring of the disease.
In the last decade, a number of prospective clinical trials with carefully designed study protocols have been conducted for the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD). These landmark clinical trials such as ANCHOR and MARINA and, more recently, the Comparison of AMD Treatment Trials and VIEW studies have revolutionized the management of neovascular AMD. While AMD continues to remain a leading cause of severe visual loss worldwide, advances in pharmacotherapeutics have led to substantial improvements in the outcome of these patients. The introduction of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor agents has resulted in improvement of visual outcomes and has had a positive impact on the quality of life among elderly population. While the contemporary management of neovascular AMD has been successful in tremendously reducing the visual morbidity, the financial burden of therapy has increased exponentially. To overcome these challenges, newer pharmacologic agents are evaluated for their efficacy and safety in AMD. Ground-breaking advances in bench to bedside research have led to discovery of new pathways that appear to be viable targets for preventing visual loss in AMD. In this review, study designs and results of landmark clinical trials in AMD from the past decade have been summarized. 
To evaluate whether drusen of subjects with fibulin-5 mutation-associated age-related macular degeneration (AMD) have clinically demonstrable drusen domains as evidenced by differences between color and fluorescein angiographic profiles. Of seven patients we identified with AMD due to mutations in the fibulin-5 gene (Fib-5 AMD), five had color fundus photography and fluorescein angiography (FA). One had bilateral choroidal neovascularization and no drusen. For each eye, the green channel (GC) of the digital RGB (Red-Green-Blue) color image and hyperfluorescent domain (HD) intensity of the FA image were registered and drusen were manually segmented and measured. Totally 75 small (≤62 μm), 110 intermediate (63-125 μm), and 30 large (>125 μm) drusen were measured in four patients within the 6 × 6 mm central macular areas. All four subjects demonstrated central or paracentral HDs within each drusen perimeter. HDs were found in association with each druse, with a HD/GC ratio of 0.82, 0.76, and 0.72 respectively for small, intermediate, and large drusen (Student T Test: P < 0.01, P < 0.01, P < 0.01). A statistical difference was found for the HD/GC ratios between small- and intermediate-sized drusen and small- and large-sized drusen but not between intermediate-sized and large-sized drusen (P = 0.001, P < 0.001, P > 0.05, respectively). AMD patients with mutations in fibulin-5 share drusen phenotypic structure and have HD/GC ratios that are similar to individuals with cuticular or basal laminar drusen. Drusen substructure may reflect similarities in drusen stage and/or genesis and appear to vary among AMD genotypes. 
To assess choroidal thickness (CT) and its relationship to retinal sensitivity in mild/moderate age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Seventy-two eyes of 51 participants with mild/moderate AMD and 36 eyes of 18 age-matched normal participants were prospectively recruited to undergo enhanced-depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) imaging and microperimetry (MP) functional assessment. OCT-measured CT and retinal thickness (RT) were matched with MP sensitivity at 13 retinal loci, and correlations were analysed.
Patients with AMD had an average RT 56.5 μm greater than those without AMD (p < 0.001). There was no significant difference in CT between normal and AMD participants (p = 0.36). In patients without atrophy or pigment epithelial detachment, there was no correlation between MP sensitivity and CT (p = 0.08); however, a correlation between RT and MP was detected (b = 0.006, p = 0.046). Among patients without AMD, MP sensitivity was positively correlated with RT (b = 0.007, p < 0.001) and negatively correlated with CT (b = 0.0046, p = 0.035).
CT does not correlate with retinal sensitivity in AMD. Although choroidal damage and impaired choroidal perfusion appear to be important concepts in AMD pathogenesis, increasing choroidal thinning may not be associated with worsening retinal function in AMD.
To estimate the incidence, size, and growth rate of geographic atrophy (GA) during 5 years of follow-up among participants in the Comparison of Age-Related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials (CATT).
Cohort within a clinical trial.
Participants included in CATT.
A total of 1185 CATT participants were randomly assigned to ranibizumab or bevacizumab treatment and to 3 treatment regimens. Participants were released from protocol treatment at 2 years and examined at approximately 5 years (N = 647). Two masked graders assessed the presence and size of GA in digital color photographs (CPs) and fluorescein angiograms (FAs) taken at baseline and years 1, 2, and 5. Cox proportional hazard models were used to identify risk factors for incidence of GA. Annual change in the square root of the total area of GA was the measure of growth. Multivariate linear mixed models including baseline demographic, treatment, and ocular characteristics on CP/FA and optical coherence tomography (OCT) as candidate risk factors were used to estimate adjusted growth rates, standard errors (SEs), and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
Geographic atrophy incidence and growth rate.
Among the 1011 participants who did not have GA at baseline and had follow-up images gradable for GA, the cumulative incidence was 12% at 1 year, 17% at 2 years, and 38% at 5 years. At baseline, older age, hypercholesterolemia, worse visual acuity, larger choroidal neovascularization (CNV) area, retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) lesion, GA in the fellow eye, and intraretinal fluid were associated with a higher risk of incident GA. Thicker subretinal tissue complex and presence of subretinal fluid were associated with less GA development. The overall GA growth rate was 0.33 mm/year (SE, 0.02 mm/year). Eyes treated with ranibizumab in the first 2 years of the clinical trial had a higher growth rate than eyes treated with bevacizumab (adjusted growth rate, 0.38 vs. 0.28 mm/year; P = 0.009). Geographic atrophy in the fellow eye, hemorrhage, and absence of sub-retinal pigment epithelium fluid at baseline were associated with a higher growth rate.
Development of GA is common 5 years after initiating therapy. Several risk factors identified at 2 years of follow-up persist at 5 years of follow-up.
Subjective expectations regarding future health may influence patients' judgement of current health and treatment effects, as well as adherence to therapies in chronic diseases. We aimed to explore subjective expectations on longevity and future health-related quality of life (HRQOL) of patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) treated with antiVEGF injections and analyse the influencing factors.
Consecutive AMD patients in two ophthalmology centres were included. Demographics, clinical characteristics and informal care utilisation were recorded. Current health was evaluated by the EQ-5D generic health status questionnaire and time trade-off (TTO) methods. Happiness was measured on a visual analogue scale (VAS). Subjective life-expectancy and expected EQ-5D status at ages 70, 80 and 90 were surveyed. T-test was applied to compare subgroups and Pearson correlations were performed to analyse relationships between variables.
One hundred twenty two patients were involved (females 62%) with a mean (SD) age of 75.2 (7.9) years and disease duration of 2.9 (2.5) years. The majority were in AREDS-4 state, the better eye's ETDRS was 64.7 (15.4). EQ-5D and TTO revealed moderate deterioration of health (0.66 vs. 0.72, p = 0.131), happiness VAS was 6.3 (2.2). Correlation between EQ-5D and ETDRS was moderate (R = 0.242, p < 0.05) and having both versus one eye in AREDS-4 resulted lower TTO (0.68 vs. 0.83; p = 0.013). Subjective life-expectancy did not differ significantly from statistical life-expectancy and had no significant impact on TTO. The self-estimated mean EQ-5D score was 0.60, 0.40 and 0.24 for ages 70, 80 and 90 which is lower than the population norm of age-groups 65-74, 75-84 and 85+ (0.77, 0.63 and 0.63, respectively). Age, gender, current EQ-5D, need for informal care and happiness were deterministic factors of subjective health expectations.
AMD patients with antiVEGF treatment have comparable HRQOL as the age-matched general public but expect a more severe deterioration of health with age. Older patients with worse HRQOL have worse subjective expectations. Exploring patients' health expectations provides an opportunity for ophthalmologists to correct misperceptions and improve the quality of AMD care. Further studies should provide evidences on the relationship between subjective expectations and actual health outcomes, and on its impact on patients' AMD-specific health behaviour.
To compare outcomes in patients with treatment-naïve neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) receiving ranibizumab treat and extend (TE) with those receiving ranibizumab pro re nata (PRN) in a clinical setting.
During this 12-month retrospective, consecutive, comparative case series, patients received ranibizumab 0.5 mg according to a TE or PRN regimen. Monthly optical coherence tomography (OCT) evaluation was performed during the PRN regimen; retreatment criteria included recurrence of intra-/subretinal fluid, or haemorrhages. During the TE regimen, initial treatment with 4-week intervals was sequentially lengthened by 2 weeks until signs of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) activity recurred. Study end-points included mean change in best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and central retinal thickness (CRT), mean injection frequency and number of follow-up visits attended.
Baseline characteristics were similar between the TE (n = 70) and PRN (n = 70) groups. Mean change in BCVA from baseline to Month 12 was significantly greater in the TE group than the PRN group (+0.18 ± 0.17 versus +0.07 ± 0.20, p < 0.001). Mean change in CRT from baseline to Month 12 was greater in the TE group than the PRN group (-116 ± 132 versus -58 ± 157 μm, p = 0.019). The number of follow-up visits attended was significantly higher in the PRN group than the TE group (11.9 ± 1.1 versus 8.6 ± 1.9, p < 0.001), while patients in the TE group received more injections during the study than those in the PRN group (8.6 ± 1.9 versus 6.0 ± 1.9, p < 0.001).
Ranibizumab administered using a TE regimen in treatment-naïve patients with nAMD provided better visual outcomes with fewer clinic visits, compared with a PRN regimen.
To evaluate functional changes (retinal sensitivity and fixation characteristics) determined by microperimetry in patients with early and intermediate AMD over 6 years.
Prospective, longitudinal follow-up (FU) study of 16 patients (29 eyes) with early and intermediate AMD (AREDS 2 and AREDS 3 classification). All eyes underwent: complete ophthalmic examination with best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) determination, color fundus photo (CFP), optical coherence tomography and microperimetry. All CFP were evaluated by two retinal specialists masked to functional data for changes in severity of clinical features over the course of FU.
Of 17 eyes graded as AREDS 2 at baseline, 14 (82.35 %) remained stable, and 3 (18.75 %) progressed to AREDS 3. Of 12 eyes graded as AREDS 3 at baseline, 10 remained stable (83.33 %), and 2 (16.67 %) progressed to AREDS 4. Mean BCVA significantly deteriorated in both AREDS 2 (p = 0.006) and AREDS 3 (p = 0.016), with greater decrease in AREDS 3 (p = 0.01)6. Mean retinal sensitivity (RS) significantly decreased over time in both AREDS 2 (p < 0.0001) and AREDS 3 group (p = 0.002), with greater decrease in AREDS 3 (p = 0.006). The mean number of dense scotomas did not change in AREDS 2 (p = 0.3), but significantly increased in the AREDS 3 group (p = 0.035). Points with decreased RS were located in all but the central point (p < 0.0001 for all), without significant differences in number among rings. In the AREDS 2 group, fixation stability remained unchanged. In the AREDS 3 group, four eyes deteriorated from stable to unstable fixation at FU (p = 0.045).
A significant deterioration in RS is reported in early and intermediate AMD eyes, whereas fixation stability changed only in intermediate AMD (AREDS 3) over long-term follow-up. Microperimetry examination can become a new functional biomarker in early and intermediate AMD patients.
To assess how polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) is recognized and treated, and to assess whether treatment outcomes are different between Chinese and Caucasian Canadian patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Retrospective chart review.
154 eyes from 135 Chinese patients and 2291 eyes from 1792 Caucasian patients who were newly diagnosed with either AMD or PCV and had more than 1 year of follow-up were included.
All newly diagnosed AMD patients presenting to the Retina Service of 3 Toronto University Hospitals, between March 25, 2008, to September 30, 2014, were reviewed.
10/154 eyes (6.5%) in Chinese Canadians and 16/2291 eyes (0.7%) in Caucasian Canadians were diagnosed as having PCV. Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) was used to diagnose PCV in 20% of Chinese Canadians and 8.8% of Caucasian Canadians. Clinical practices with a larger percentage of Chinese patients were more likely to diagnose PCV in both Chinese (p = 0.004) and Caucasian patients (p = 0.03), were more likely to use photodynamic therapy (PDT) (p < 0.01), and had significantly greater central retinal thickness decrease (p < 0.001).
Our study has shown that PCV is under-recognized in a Canadian population, and ICGA is underutilized. In clinical practices with a greater portion of Chinese patients, PCV is more often recognized and PDT is used more liberally.
Epidemiologic evidence of a relationship between thyroid dysfunction and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is inconsistent and unclear. We aimed to assess the prospective associations between serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine (FT4) measurements, as well as thyroid dysfunction (hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism) and incidence of AMD.
Categories of thyroid dysfunction were defined according to a serum TSH screen followed by serum FT4 assessment, and were available in 906 participants (aged 55+ years) at risk of AMD incidence (from 1997-1999 to 2007-2009). Continuous serum FT4 measures were available regardless of TSH screening results in 583 participants at risk of AMD incidence. Age-related macular degeneration was assessed from retinal photographs.
Participants with overt hyperthyroidism compared to those with normal thyroid function at baseline had increased risk of developing any incident AMD, after adjusting for age, sex, smoking, fish consumption, and variants in AMD susceptibility genes (CFH and ARMS2): odds ratio (OR) 3.51 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.16-10.65). Participants who reported current use of thyroxine (n = 67; 7.3%) versus those who were not current users (n = 839) had a 68% increased risk of incident AMD, multivariable-adjusted OR 1.68 (95% CI 1.01-2.82). Similarly, participants who had ever been on thyroxine medication (n = 77; 8.4%) compared to those who had never been on thyroxine (n = 829) also had a higher risk of any AMD, multivariable-adjusted OR 1.91 (95% CI 1.18-3.09).
Overt hyperthyroidism was independently associated with an increased risk of incident AMD. Thyroxine usage in older adults was also positively associated with incidence of AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a disease of the macula that significantly affects eyesight and leads to irreversible central vision loss. Recent studies have demonstrated that angiogenesis is the most important mechanism of AMD development. It is associated with extracellular remodeling involving different proteolytic systems, among them matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which play an essential role in the etiopathogenesis of AMD. The main objective of the present study was to determine the relationship between exudative AMD and MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) rs243865 polymorphism.
The study enrolled 267 patients with exudative AMD and 318 controls. DNA was extracted from peripheral venous blood leukocytes by commercial kits. Genotyping of MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) rs243865 was carried out using real-time polymerase chain reaction method.
The analysis of MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) polymorphism did not reveal any differences in the distribution of CC, CT, and TT genotypes between the exudative AMD and control groups: 58.8%, 31.5% and 9.7% vs. 59.75%, 33.96% and 6.29%, respectively, P = 0.287). When the study population was subdivided into age groups, MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) rs243865 CT genotype showed 5.7-fold increased the risk of exudative AMD development compared to CC and TT genotypes together in younger (<65 years) males group (P = 0.05).
MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) polymorphism is associated with exudative AMD development in younger males.
To evaluate the role of a fast track for management of patients with neovascular age- related macular degeneration (nARMD) treated by intravitreal injection of anti-VEGF.
The records of 100 patients in the chronic maintenance phase of intravitreal anti-VEGF followed in the fast track and 63 patients followed in the standard protocol for at least 12 months were retrospectively analyzed.
Patients in the fast track underwent visual acuity (VA) testing by ETDRS, optical coherence tomography (OCT) and a physician assessment. The injection was performed the same day whenever possible. The primary endpoint to evaluate patient adherence was the time between the ideal date of visit or injection prescribed by the physician and the actual date of administration.
The mean time between the ideal date of visit or injection prescribed by the physician and the actual date of administration was 4.1±7.5 days for the patients followed in the fast track and 5.6±18.7 days for the patients followed in the standard protocol. Mean VA remained stable for the patients followed in the fast track: 20/50 (20/800 to 20/20) at baseline vs. 20/50 (20/800 to 20/16) at the conclusion of follow-up. It dropped from 40/50 at baseline to 20/63 at the conclusion of follow-up for the patients followed in the standard protocol.
In the context of a fast track, it was possible to improve the adherence of nARMD patients and maintain their VA gain or stabilization achieved after the induction phase.
To investigate whether the severity of the condition in the untreated fellow eye is a predictive factor for the response to intravitreal aflibercept injection (IAI) for exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
A retrospective medical chart review was conducted for 88 patients with treatment-naïve neovascular AMD, who were initially treated with three monthly IAIs, followed by monthly monitoring and re-injection as needed for at least 12 months. Subjects were classified into three groups according to the severity of the condition in their untreated eye, based on the severity scale in the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS): group 0, AREDS severity level 1 (no drusen); group 1, AREDS severity level 2 or 3 (any drusen); group 2, AREDS severity level 4 (advanced AMD). Genotyping was performed in all cases for ARMS2 A69S and CFH I62V.
Fellow-eye severity was associated with age and the risk variant of ARMS2 A69S (P = 0.005 and 0.001, respectively). Although best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) had improved significantly after 12 months in all groups, this improvement was significantly greater in group 0 than in the other groups (P = 0.008). The retreatment-free period was also significantly longer for group 0 than for the other groups (P = 0.016), and the number of additional injections was significantly associated with fellow-eye severity (P = 0.007).
Fellow-eye severity was associated with treatment response in terms of visual improvement and retreatment and may be a predictive factor for response to IAI for neovascular AMD.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of multiple intravitreal ranibizumab (IVR) injections on the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
One hundred sixty-eight eyes of 168 patients with nAMD who received an IVR at least 3 times were included in this prospective interventional case series. The RNFL thickness data on 80 healthy eyes, used as the control group, were obtained. The patients were grouped as follows: 3-10 injections (group 1, 62 eyes, 37%), 10-20 injections (group 2, 62 eyes, 37%), and ≥20 injections (group 3, 44 eyes, 26%). The RNFL thickness was measured by spectral domain optical coherence tomography.
The mean baseline measurement of the RNFL thickness was 97.4 ± 6.4 μm in the control group, 96.4 ± 5.6 μm in group 1, 93.8 ± 4.6 μm in group 2, and 93.2 ± 5.3 μm in group 3. At the last follow-up, it was 95.1 ± 2.4 μm in the control group, 93.4 ± 7.3 μm in group 1, 90.5 ± 3.6 μm in group 2, and 89.2 ± 4.9 μm in group 3 (all P values >0.050). A statistically significant difference was not found between the mean total RNFL thickness of the eyes that received injections and that of the eyes in the healthy control group (P value >0.050). A statistically significant difference was not found in all the treatment groups between the intraocular pressure level taken 1 day after the administration of the injections and that recorded preintervention (all P values >0.050).
Repeated IVR did not lead to a significant change in RNFL thickness in patients with nAMD.
To determine the rate of reticular pseudodrusen (RPD) in age-related macular degeneration using multimodal imaging, including color fundus photography, the blue channel image of fundus photography, infrared reflectance, fundus autofluorescence, multicolor imaging, and spectral domain optical coherence tomography, as well as to compare the sensitivities and specificities of these modalities for detecting RPD.
This prospective study included 243 eyes from 125 consecutive patients with age-related macular degeneration. They underwent fundus examination including color fundus photography, blue channel, infrared reflectance, fundus autofluorescence, multicolor imaging, and spectral domain optical coherence tomography in both eyes. To be considered as having RPD, eyes had to have reticular patterns on spectral domain optical coherence tomography in a large studied cube of 30° × 25° or on infrared reflectance with at least one other examination.
The mean age of the 125 patients was 81.1 years (± 8.1). Eighty-six patients (68.8%) were diagnosed with RPD. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography, infrared reflectance, and multicolor imaging had the highest sensitivity (99.3, 84.6, and 87.1%, respectively) and specificity (100%). The color fundus photography, blue channel, and fundus autofluorescence had lower sensitivity to detect RPD.
Reticular pseudodrusen is frequently associated with soft drusen in patients with age-related macular degeneration. As RPD may be rarely located only in the perifoveal area, spectral domain optical coherence tomography with a larger cube (30 × 25°) than that usually used (20 × 20°) had the highest sensitivity and specificity to detect RPD and is recommended to optimize the rate of detection.
To report 24-month outcomes of a treat and extend (T&E) regimen using aflibercept in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
This was a database observational study that included treatment-naive eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration tracked by the Fight Retinal Blindness! outcome registry completing 24 months of sole monotherapy with aflibercept treatment under a T&E regimen between November 1, 2012 and January 31, 2014. Locally weighted scatterplot smoothing curves were used to display visual acuity outcomes. Main outcome measures were change in visual acuity at 24 months and number of injections and visits during the study period.
The study population, identified by reviewing the database, consisted of 136 eyes from 123 patients completing 24 months of follow-up on aflibercept. Mean (SD) age was 77.2 (7.0) years, 59% were female. Mean visual acuity increased from 61.4 (∼20/60; SD 17.4) letters at baseline to 67.4 (∼20/45; SD 17.7) letters at 24 months (+6.0 letters [95% confidence interval: 3.3-8.5]; P < 0.001). From baseline to 24 months, the proportion of eyes with visual acuity ≥70 letters (20/40) increased (40%-58%, P < 0.001) and the proportion of eyes with visual acuity ≤35 letters (20/200) remained the same (10%; P = 0.547). Ninety-eight per cent of eyes starting with visual acuity ≥70 letters (20/40) were able to maintain this up to 24 months. From the first to the second year of treatment, the mean number of injections (7.8 [2.1] vs. 5.7 [2.6]; P < 0.001) and visits (8.7 [1.7] vs. 6.5 [2.4]; P < 0.001) decreased for eyes completing 24 months of treatment. When data from 60 eligible eyes that did not complete 2 years follow-up, along with 14 eyes that switched to ranibizumab, were included using last observation carried forward, the mean change in visual acuity from baseline was +5.6 letters (95% confidence interval: 3.3-7.7).
These data indicate that eyes treated with aflibercept, as a sole therapy, in routine clinical practice with a T&E regimen can achieve good visual outcomes while decreasing the burden of treatments and clinic visits.
The results of intravitreal ranibizumab treatment for exsudative age-related macular degeneration have been favourable until this time.
To evaluate the two-year functional and anatomic results of intravitreal ranibizumab treatment.
46 patients (age: 75 ± 9.1 years) were included in a prospective single center study. Treatment regimen was the following: monthly 0.5 mg ranibizumab was administered in the first 3 months, and later as required (pro re nata). The change of best corrected visual acuity and central retinal thickness was followed.
The visus change at the end of the follow-up time was not statistically significant compared to baseline (p = 0.760) and the at the end of the first year (p = 0.154). Central retinal thickness decreased significantly compared to baseline (p = 0.000001), but the change was not statistically significant compared to the end of the first year (p = 0.875).
Patients with neovascular macular degeneration treated with intravitreal ranibizumab using pro re nata regimen have stable visus for long term, and the exsudation could be reduced efficiently.
To investigate the effect of vitreomacular adhesion (VMA) on the outcome of antiangiogenic treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Ninety-nine eyes of 83 patients were used in our cohort study. We prospectively evaluated best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and central retinal thickness (CRT) in patients with neovascular AMD at baseline and 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months after treatment with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents. All patients were stratified by spectral domain optical coherence tomography into 2 groups (i.e., VMA[+] and VMA[-]) according to the presence or absence of VMA, and the response to treatment was evaluated.
Fifty-four eyes (54.5%) were included in the VMA(-) group and 45 eyes (45.5%) comprised the VMA(+) group. In paired comparisons of mean BCVA between baseline and each follow-up visit (1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months), the VMA(-) group showed statistically significant improvement at 1, 2, and 3 months compared to baseline, and BCVA significantly improved only at 3 months in the VMA(+) group. For both groups, paired comparisons of CRT showed a statistically significant decrease when data obtained at 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months were compared to baseline values (p < 0.05).
Posterior VMA is associated with a worse short-term outcome in patients with neovascular AMD treated with anti-VEGF agents.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a disease of the outer retina, characterized most significantly by atrophy of photoreceptors and retinal pigment epithelium accompanied with or without choroidal neovascularization. Development of AMD has been recognized as contingent on environmental and genetic risk factors, the strongest being advanced age. In this review, we highlight pathogenic changes that destabilize ocular homeostasis and promote AMD development. With normal aging, photoreceptors are steadily lost, Bruch's membrane thickens, the choroid thins, and hard drusen may form in the periphery. In AMD, many of these changes are exacerbated in addition to the development of disease-specific factors such as soft macular drusen. Para-inflammation, which can be thought of as an intermediate between basal and robust levels of inflammation, develops within the retina in an attempt to maintain ocular homeostasis, reflected by increased expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 coupled with shifts in macrophage plasticity from the pro-inflammatory M1 to the anti-inflammatory M2 polarization. In AMD, imbalances in the M1 and M2 populations together with activation of retinal microglia are observed and potentially contribute to tissue degeneration. Nonetheless, the retina persists in a state of chronic inflammation and increased expression of certain cytokines and inflammasomes is observed. Since not everyone develops AMD, the vital question to ask is how the body establishes a balance between normal age-related changes and the pathological phenotypes in AMD. 
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of vision loss in the western world. This multifactorial disease results from the combined contributions of age, environment and genetic predisposition. Antibody-based treatment of late-stage neovascular AMD with inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor has had great success, which is now the goal for currently untreatable AMD manifestations. The existence of an immune-privileged environment in the eye supports the feasibility of localized antibody therapy. Many different antibodies against various targets are being developed for the treatment of AMD, which reflects the etiological complexity of the disease. This review provides an overview of 19 potential therapeutic antibodies targeting angiogenesis, the complement system, inflammation or amyloid beta deposition in the eye. It summarizes the immunoglobulin structure, the specific target and study outcomes for each approach. The latter include beneficial results or adverse effects in AMD models and patients. Finally, this article discusses the challenges in the development of antibody-based drugs to treat degenerative processes in the posterior eye. In spite of these difficulties, to date, the following four antibodies have overcome the technical and preclinical hurdles and are being tested in active clinical studies: Lampalizumab, Sonepcizumab, GSK933776 and LFG316. We conclude that, while there are some antibody-based drugs that have made it into clinical practice, a successful transfer from bench to beside is still pending for many promising approaches. 
While the importance of risk polymorphisms for the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is well established, their impact on morphological and functional phenotypes is largely unclear. We aimed to characterize individual phenotypes in patients who were either homozygous for a risk allele in the CFH gene, ARMS2 gene, or both as compared to non-carriers.
Patients with early AMD (n = 85) were assessed during a follow-up examination of a prospective study (MARS) with multimodal diagnostics including SD-OCT and microperimetry.
Compared to non-carriers, OCT scans revealed lower retinal thickness in patients homozygous for CFH or ARMS2, which was caused by a significantly reduced photoreceptor layer. The number and ultrastructure of drusen were also significantly different.
These findings indicate that patients with risk alleles demonstrate distinct phenotypic differences of morphology and function as compared to non-carriers. In particular in the CFH group, a loss of photoreceptors occurred concomitantly with reduced retinal sensitivity. Further studies might help to better understand the pathophysiology.
With account to the increase in the elderly population in most of the developed countries, the WHO defines age-related macular degeneration (AMD) as one of the main causes of blindness in the world. A large percentage of disability is accounted for by exudative, or neovascular, form of AMD. Today, a total of 5 anti-VEGF drugs exist that are recommended for treatment of exudative AMD: pegaptanib, ranibizumab, bevacizumab, aflibercept, and conbercept. Despite significant progress in the treatment of neovascular AMD yielded by the introduction into clinical practice of anti-VEGF drugs, some patients report a lack (down to complete lack) of response with standard treatment patterns and even a decrease in treatment efficacy after repeated intravitreal injections.
Backgroud: Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is one of the leading causes of irreversible blindness of the elder people. This research was intended to demonstrate the different expression of microRNAs (miRNA) in AMD patients and whether they can be used as biomarkers for AMD.
MiRNAs expression was measured by microarray of 6 AMD cases and 6 gender matched controls. In a larger-sample case-control study with 126 AMD cases and 140 controls, whole blood samples were detected for the differences of miRNA expression.
A total of 216 differentially expressed miRNAs (111 increased and 105 decreased miRNAs) were detected from circulating miRNA microarray. Expanded case-control study results showed that the expression of miR-27a-3p, miR-29b-3p and miR-195-5p was increased significantly. Moreover, the level of miR-27a is higher in patients with wet AMD compared to patients with dry AMD. All 3 miRNAs showed a potential diagnostic value for AMD.
Circulating miRNA levels were significantly varied in AMD patients. Three miRNAs, miR-27a-3p, miR-29b-3p and the miR-195-5p, might be potential diagnostic biomarkers for AMD.
We reviewed the current literature on the ability of microperimetry to detect non-neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) disease progression. The index test was retinal sensitivity measurement assessed by microperimetry and comparators were other functional measures (best-corrected and low-luminance visual acuities, and fixation stability) and structural parameters [retinal thickness, choroidal thickness, and area of geographic atrophy (GA) determined by color fundus photographs, short-wave or near-infrared fundus autofluorescence]. The reference standard was area of GA. The literature search was conducted in January 2016 and included MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Biosis, Science Citation Index, ProQuest Health and Medicine, CINAHL, and Highwire Press. We included 6 studies that enrolled 41 eyes with intermediate AMD (from a single study) and 80 eyes with GA secondary to AMD. Retinal sensitivity measured by microperimetry was the only functional measure that consistently detected progression in each cohort. Insufficient reported data precluded meta-analysis. Various microperimetry parameters were used to assess cohort-level change in retinal sensitivity, but the methods of analysis have yet to mature in complexity in comparison with established glaucoma field progression analysis. Microperimetry-assessed retinal sensitivity measurement may be more sensitive in detecting progression than other functional measures in non-neovascular AMD. However, the lack of standardized testing protocol and methods of progression analysis hindered comparison. Harmonization of testing protocol and development of more robust methods of analyzing raw microperimetric data will facilitate clinical implementation of this valuable retinal assessment tool.
The hypothesis that oral supplementation of the epilutein/lutein combination could augment the macular pigment optical density (MPOD) in patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) was tested.
In a prospective randomized interventional study, 40 consecutive patients with early-stage AMD were recruited. After a 2-week run-in period, patients were randomly treated with a daily oral administration of 8 mg epilutein and 2 mg lutein (group 1) or 10 mg lutein (group 2) for 2 months. At baseline (BL) and 1-month (M1) and 2-month visits (M2), all patients underwent a complete ophthalmological examination, including measurement of MPOD in a 7° area (Visucam 200; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Milan, Italy). Xanthophylls were quantified in plasma, as well as the HDL, non-HDL, and erythrocyte fractions at each study visit.
Twenty-one patients (mean age 69.4 ± 6.7 years, 35 eyes) were included in group 1. Mean MPOD was 0.203 ± 0.02 optical density units (ODU) at BL, and increased to 0.214 ± 0.04 ODU at M1 (p = 0.008) and 0.206 ± 0.03 ODU at M2 (p = 0.04). Sixteen patients (mean age 72.0 ± 6.3 years, 29 eyes) were included in group 2. Mean MPOD was 0.215 ± 0.03 at BL, which reduced to 0.202 ± 0.03 ODU at M1 (p = 0.003) and 0.207 ± 0.02 ODU at M2 (p < 0.001). A rise in the systemic level of total xanthophylls was observed at M1 for both groups. At M2, total xanthophylls were significantly increased only in group 1 and decreased in group 2.
In patients with early-stage AMD, the administration of lutein in combination with epilutein was associated with an increased MPOD compared to the administration of lutein alone.
To address the most dynamic and current issues concerning human genetics, risk factors, pharmacoeconomics, and prevention regarding age-related macular degeneration.
An online review of the database Pubmed and Ovid was performed, searching for the key words: age-related macular degeneration, AMD, pharmacoeconomics, risk factors, VEGF, prevention, genetics and their compound phrases. The search was limited to articles published since 1985 to date. All returned articles were carefully screened and their references were manually reviewed for additional relevant data. The webpage www.clinicaltrials.gov was also accessed in search of relevant research trials.
A total of 366 articles were reviewed, including 64 additional articles extracted from the references and 25 webpages and online databases from different institutions. At the end, only 244 references were included in this review.
Age-related macular degeneration is a complex multifactorial disease that has an uneven manifestation around the world but with one common denominator, it is increasing and spreading. The economic burden that this disease poses in developed nations will increase in the coming years. Effective preventive therapies need to be developed in the near future.
This retrospective cohort study examines the association between cataract surgery and neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) during 5-year follow-up using population-based claims data.
We analysed data sourced from the Taiwan Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2005. The study included 3465 patients who had undergone cataract operations and did not have a diagnosis of AMD before or on the surgery date (study group), and 10 395 age- and sex-matched comparison patients selected randomly from the remaining patients without an AMD diagnosis before the index date. We tracked the claims of each patient for a 5-year period to identify patients with a subsequent diagnosis of neovascular AMD.
The incidence rate of neovascular AMD was 0.88 (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.66-1.14) per 1000 person-years among all sampled patients, 1.60 (95% CI: 1.04-2.36) among the cataract surgery patients and 0.64 (95% CI: 0.43-0.91) among comparison patients (p < 0.001). Stratified Cox proportional analysis showed that relative to the comparison cohort, the adjusted hazard ratio for neovascular AMD during 5-year follow-up was 2.68 (95% CI: 1.55-4.66) for patients who had undergone cataract operation. We censored those who died during follow-up period and adjusted for patients' monthly income, geographical location, urbanization level, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease and hyperlipidaemia.
This study demonstrated epidemiological evidence of a link between cataract surgery and neovascular AMD during a 5-year follow-up period.
To validate known and determine new predictors of non-response to ranibizumab in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and to incorporate these factors into a prediction rule.
This multicenter, observational cohort study included 391 patients treated with ranibizumab for neovascular AMD. We performed genetic analysis for single nucleotide polymorphisms in AMD-associated genes and collected questionnaires regarding environmental factors and disease history. The primary outcome was non-response to treatment, defined as a loss of visual acuity ≥30% of letters.
Of the 391 patients, 47 were classified as non-responsive. Independent predictors for non-response were age, baseline visual acuity, diabetes mellitus and accumulation of risk alleles in the CFH, ARMS2 and VEGF-A genes. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve was 0.77 (95% confidence interval 0.70-0.84). We derived a clinical prediction rule, with possible total risk scores ranging from 0-19 points. The absolute risk of non-response varied from 3-52% between risk score groups.
This is an important step towards a clinical prediction rule that can aid clinicians in identifying AMD patients with increased likelihood of non-response, and consequently contribute to making shared treatment decisions.
To determine inflammation-related intraocular and systemic cytokine concentrations in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) compared with controls and to assess the influence of long-term intravitreal ranibizumab treatment over 1 year.
Aqueous humour and blood plasma of 21 controls and 17 treatment-naive nAMD patients were collected prior to cataract surgery or ranibizumab treatment. Follow-up specimens in nAMD patients were acquired immediately prior to subsequent ranibizumab injections as needed. Multiplex bead assays were conducted for ten inflammation-related cytokines and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). p-values were Holm-Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons.
Prior to ranibizumab treatment, initiation aqueous humour levels of monocyte chemo-attractant protein (MCP)-1/CCL2 (p = 0.005) and vascular cell adhesin molecule (VCAM) (p = 0.002) were elevated in nAMD compared with controls. Other intraocular cytokines did not differ, including VEGF. In plasma, no differences between nAMD patients and controls were found at baseline. Pro re nata ranibizumab treatment over 12 months with 8 ± 2 injections reduced aqueous VEGF (p < 0.0001) with a trend to reduced VEGF plasma concentrations (p = 0.046), with all specimens taken at least 28 days after the previous injection. All other local and systemic cytokines remained unchanged.
Neovascular age-related macular degeneration is associated with local ocular MCP-1/CCL2 and VCAM elevations, suggesting a local inflammatory involvement in the pathophysiology of nAMD. We did not detect systemic differences. Ranibizumab treatment does not result in local or systemic changes of these cytokines, in contrast to VEGF suppression. MCP-1/CCL2 and VCAM may be potential additional treatment targets for nAMD.
Nitrosative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of age related macular degeneration (AMD). Tyrosine nitration is a unique type of post translational modification that occurs in the setting of inflammation and nitrosative stress. To date, the significance and functional implications of tyrosine nitration of complement factor H (CFH), a key complement regulator in the eye has not been explored, and is examined in this study in the context of AMD pathogenesis.Sections of eyes from deceased individuals with AMD (n = 5) demonstrated the presence of immunoreactive nitrotyrosine CFH. We purified nitrated CFH from retinae from 2 AMD patients. Mass spectrometry of CFH isolated from AMD eyes revealed nitrated residues in domains critical for binding to heparan sulphate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), lipid peroxidation by-products and complement (C) 3b.Functional studies revealed that nitrated CFH did not bind to lipid peroxidation products, nor to the GAG of perlecan nor to C3b. There was loss of cofactor activity for Factor I mediated cleavage of C3b with nitrated CFH compared to non-nitrated CFH. CFH inhibits, but nitrated CFH significantly potentiates, the secretion of the pro-inflammatory and angiogenic cytokine IL-8 from monocytes that have been stimulated with lipid peroxidation by-products. AMD patients (n = 30) and controls (n = 30) were used to measure plasma nitrated CFH using a novel ELISA. AMD patients had significantly elevated nitrated CFH levels compared to controls (p = 0.0117). These findings strongly suggest that nitrated CFH contributes to AMD progression, and is a target for therapeutic intervention.
Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD) is a multifactorial disease causing visual impairment in old age. Oxidative stress is one of the main contributors for the disease progression. Paraoxonase (PON), a HDL-resident antioxidant enzyme which removes oxidized low density lipoprotein (oxLDL), which is not studied much in AMD. This study assesses the PON activities in relation to the lipid status and genetic variants in AMD patients. In this prospective case-control study, a total of 48 AMD patients and 30 unrelated healthy controls were recruited. The serum oxLDL and Plasma Homocysteine (Hcy) levels were estimated by ELISA. Plasma Homocysteine thiolactone (HCTL) was estimated by HPLC. Serum PON activities were estimated by spectrophotometry. PON gene expression was assessed by qPCR and protein expression by western blot, immunofluorescence and FACS analysis. Two known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the coding region of PON1, Q192R and L55M variants were checked in the AMD patients and controls and their association with PON activity and lipid levels were determined. Serum paraoxonase (PONase) and thiolactonase (PON-HCTLase) activities were significantly elevated in AMD patients than in controls apart from elevated serum levels of total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TG), oxLDL. While serum LDL levels in AMD patients correlate positively with PON HCTLase activity, the serum high density lipoprotein (HDL) correlates with both PONase and PON-HCTLase activities. However, multiple regression analysis showed that, amongst the parameters, only serum TG was a significant risk factor for AMD, after adjusting for demographic parameters as well as cataract. PON2 was significantly increased at the level of gene expression (p = 0.03) as seen in circulating peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of AMD patients possibly mediated by the transcription factor SP1, that showed 2-fold increase. PON1 and 2 protein expressions also showed significant increase in the PBMC of AMD patients. At serum level, PON1 protein was significantly increased in AMD patients. Cholesterol transporters such as CD36, SR-B1 and ABCA1 gene expressions were also found to be higher (1.5, 1.9 and 2.4-fold respectively) in AMD, though not statistically significant. While the wet AMD (CNV) was found to be associated with increase in oxLDL and serum PONase activity, the dry AMD was associated with increased HDL and serum PON-HCTLase activity. The genotype and allele frequencies of Q192R & L55M were not significantly different between AMD patients and controls. However, altered lipid status and PON activities were associated with the genotype in AMD patients. A higher enzyme activity was observed for the RR genotype of Q192R in the cohort, irrespective of case and control. Thus the PON genotype and phenotype seem to play a role in the pathogenesis of AMD.
To evaluate outer retina and choroidal thickness in subjects with intermediate age-related macular degeneration (iAMD) and to describe associations with the presence of reticular pseudodrusen (RPD).
This was a retrospective, cross-sectional analysis of 157 consecutive eyes (specifically: 62 eyes classified as having RPD and 95 eyes with drusen ≥125 µm). Only cases with digital color fundus photographs, red-free, and infrared, obtained and graded according to the Age-Related Eye Disease Study to define iAMD, were used for this study. Outer retina and choroidal thickness were manually segmented and quantified at 12 locations in the horizontal meridian.
RPD appeared to be associated with thinning of the outer layers even after adjustment for gender and age. The presence of RPD in iAMD decreased with increase of choroidal thickness (total odds ratio [OR] 0.991, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.985-0.996; nasal OR 0.992, 95% CI 0.986-0.997), with increased thickness of the myoid zone of the photoreceptors (total OR 0.812, 95% CI 0.688-0.958; nasal OR 0.863, 95% CI 0.755-0.987) and with increased thickness of the outer segment of the photoreceptors (total OR 0.850, 95% CI 0.731-0.989; nasal OR 0.857, 95% CI 0.736-0.989).
The greatest differences between eyes with and without RPD are found at the level of the choroidal thickness and at the level of the photoreceptors.
To briefly review age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the main findings from the Age Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) report number 8 on the use of nutritional supplements for AMD, and to focus on data suggesting that supplement use should be guided using genetic testing of AMD risk genes.
A literature search (January 2001 through October 26, 2016) was conducted using MEDLINE and the following MeSH terms: Antioxidants/therapeutic use, Genotype, Macular Degeneration/drug therapy, Macular degeneration/genetics, Dietary Supplements, Proteins/genetics, and Zinc Compounds/therapeutic use. Bibliographies of publications identified were also reviewed.
English-language studies assessing AREDS supplement response in patients with AMD in relation to complement factor H gene ( CFH) and age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 gene ( ARMS2) risk alleles were evaluated.
Three of the 4 studies demonstrated a treatment interaction between ARMS2 and CFH genotypes and a differential response to supplements. The fourth study documented an interaction for the CFH genotype only. Reported response interactions included attenuated response, no response, and good response, whereas a subset showed increased progression of AMD. Conversely, one study reported no interactions between CFH and ARMS2 risk alleles and response to supplements.
The weight of the evidence supports using genetic testing to guide selection of ocular vitamin use. This approach will avoid using supplements that could speed the progression of AMD in vulnerable patients, avoid using supplements that will have little to no effect in others, and result in appropriately using supplements in those that are likely to derive meaningful benefits.
To investigate the short-term effect of single intravitreal aflibercept injection on retrobulbar blood flow in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
Twenty eyes of 20 patients with nAMD scheduled for single intravitreal aflibercept (Eylea<sup>®</sup>) injection and 20 fellow eyes (uninjected) were enrolled in this prospective interventional study. The hemodynamic parameters of the ophthalmic artery (OA), central retinal artery (CRA) and posterior ciliary artery (PCA) comprising peak systolic velocity (PSV), end-diastolic velocity (EDV), and resistive index (RI) were measured by using color Doppler ultrasonography (CDU) in both injected and uninjected fellow eyes at baseline and 1 week after the injection.
The measured first-week values of PSV and EDV in the CRA, OA and PCA showed a statistically significant reduction when comparing baseline values in both injected and uninjected fellow eyes (p = 0.0001). Also, it was found a significant increase in the post-injection RI values of all the CRA, OA, PCA in injected eye and OA in the uninjected eye (p = 0.0001). There was any significant difference between pre- and post-injection RI values of the CRA and PCA in the fellow eyes (p = 0.137, p = 0.736, respectively).
Single intravitreal administration of aflibercept alters retrobulbar blood flow velocities (BFVs) in both injected and uninjected fellow eyes in the short-term period.
To evaluate the risk of stroke after ranibizumab treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
National registry data for 1,025,340 random subjects in the year 2002 were used. The ranibizumab group comprised patients diagnosed with neovascular age-related macular degeneration and treated with ranibizumab between 2009 and 2013 (n = 467). The two types of comparison groups were defined as comorbidity-matched controls (n = 2,330) comprised of randomly selected patients (5 per age-related macular degeneration patient), who were matched to the ranibizumab group according to sociodemographic factors, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and the Charlson comorbidities index, and sociodemographic-matched controls (n = 2,331) matched according to sociodemographic factors only. Each sampled patient was tracked until 2013. The Cox proportional hazard regression was used.
Stroke occurred in 6.6% of the ranibizumab group versus 7.0% of the comorbidity-matched controls and 6.7% of the sociodemographic-matched controls; these differences were not statistically significant. The overall incidence of stroke was similar for the ranibizumab group versus the comorbidity-matched controls and sociodemographic-matched controls, based on the multivariable Cox regression (hazard ratio = 0.88; 95% confidence interval, 0.60-1.30; hazard ratio = 0.95, 95% confidence interval, 0.64-1.41, respectively).
Ranibizumab treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration did not increase the overall risk of stroke, compared with comorbidity-matched controls or sociodemographic-matched controls.
To measure intraocular cytokine levels in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration and analyze changes in the cytokine profile 2 days after intravitreal bevacizumab injection.
This prospective case-control study enrolled 37 patients (37 eyes) with age-related macular degeneration including polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy. Twenty-eight age-matched patients (28 eyes) who underwent cataract surgery were used as controls. Undiluted aqueous humor samples were collected after intravitreal bevacizumab injection. Two days after intravitreal bevacizumab injection, cataract surgery was performed and undiluted aqueous humor samples were collected at the beginning of surgery (10 eyes). Twenty-three cytokines were measured using flow cytometry. P values were corrected in multiple comparisons using the conservative Bonferroni-Holm method. The level of significance was set at 0.0022 (0.05/23).
At baseline, aqueous humor levels of vascular endothelial growth factor, angiogenin, interferon gamma-inducible protein (IP)-10, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1β, monokine induced by interferon γ (Mig), and monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1 were significantly higher in the age-related macular degeneration group than in the control group (P < 0.0022). The result of exploratory multivariate analysis showed that elevated angiogenin level was an important factor that discriminates the two groups (P = 0.0004). Two days after intravitreal bevacizumab injection, vascular endothelial growth factor levels tended to be reduced (P = 0.049), whereas interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8 levels increased significantly (P < 0.0022).
Vascular endothelial growth factor and also angiogenin, IP-10, MCP-1, MIP-1β, and Mig may be related to the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration. Intravitreal bevacizumab injection increases inflammatory cytokine levels, suggesting the induction of an inflammatory process.
In order to investigate the influence of season and month of birth on the risk of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (n-AMD) in Italy, we evaluated the month birth and sex of all patients, recorded in the anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) monitoring registry of the Italian Medicines Agency, born between 1925-1944, who received intravitreal anti-VEGF injections for n-AMD between January 1, 2013 and July 29, 2015. The numbers of all births in Italy in the same years, extracted from the Italian National Institute of Statistics, were used to calculate the expected number of n-AMD cases. Overall, 45,845 patients (19,207 men, 26,638 women) received intravitreal anti-VEGF for n-AMD; in the same years, 20,140,426 people (10,334,262 male, 9,806,164 female) were born in Italy. Comparing the observed number of n-AMD cases with the expected number of n- AMD cases in each season, we found that the season-specific risk for n-AMD was 2.5% higher for those born in summer (OR=1.03, Bonferroni-corrected <i>P</i>=0.008) and 3% lower for those born in winter (OR=0.96, Bonferroni-corrected <i>P</i>=0.0004). When considering the month of birth, the risk of n-AMD was 5.9% lower for people born in January (OR=0.93, Bonferroni-corrected <i>P</i>=0.0012). The factors causing such differences should be determined.
Aflibercept is indicated in France for wet age-related macular degeneration (wAMD) since November 2013. Its official dosage consists in administrating one monthly intravitreal injection (IVT) during three months followed by one control visit and one IVT every two months the first year. In 2015, a group of French ophthalmologists, specialized in wAMD management, established a therapeutic algorithm to optimize naive patient management with aflibercept in order to obtain visual acuity gain. It indicates that official administration scheme is adapted for 80% of patients and that an adaptation of therapeutic scheme is needed for others. These experts recommended mostly the use of personalized proactive administration scheme. Since, aflibercept clinical use has significantly grown with interventional observational studies which results are now available. Use of aflibercept and of personalized proactive administration schemes allow in real-life obtaining important visual acuity gain, which is consistent with the established algorithm.
To assess whether best-corrected visual acuity and pigment epithelial detachment (PED) height, volume, and reflectivity in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration are influenced by baseline anatomical and functional parameters, including quantifiable metrics of PED morphology and choice of treatment.
One hundred two consecutive, treatment-naive wet age-related macular degeneration patients with PED (>50 μm) treated with aflibercept (52) or ranibizumab (50) were retrospectively included. Pigment epithelial detachment height, horizontal and vertical dimensions, and volume were recorded at baseline, 3 months, and 1 year, respectively. Bespoke image analysis software provided a quantifiable measure of reflectivity.
Best-corrected visual acuity at 3 months was influenced by baseline best-corrected visual acuity (P = 0.006). Pigment epithelial detachment height was influenced by baseline height (P = 0.009), subretinal fluid (P = 0.008), central macular thickness (P = 0.006), and use of aflibercept (P = 0.003) at 3 months and by baseline height (P = 0.018), volume (P = 0.017), vertical dimension (P = 0.0004), and aflibercept (P = 0.015) at 1 year. Pigment epithelial detachment reflectivity increased from 43.59 to 55.86 (3 months) and 57.35 (1 year) (P < 0.001) and was influenced by its baseline values and, interestingly, use of aflibercept at 3 months (P = 0.013).
Quantifiable metrics of PED morphology improve with treatment, and PED content becomes hyperreflective, more so on aflibercept. Pigment epithelial detachments respond better in the context of more active disease. More hyporeflective PED content may predispose to better treatment response, especially with aflibercept.
The development of dual targeting antibodies promises therapies with improved efficacy over mono-specific antibodies. Here, we engineered a Two-in-One VEGF/angiopoietin 2 antibody with dual action Fab (DAF) as a potential therapeutic for neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Crystal structures of the VEGF/angiopoietin 2 DAF in complex with its two antigens showed highly overlapping binding sites. To achieve sufficient affinity of the DAF to block both angiogenic factors, we turned to deep mutational scanning in the complementarity determining regions (CDRs). By mutating all three CDRs of each antibody chain simultaneously, we were able not only to identify affinity improving single mutations but also mutation pairs from different CDRs that synergistically improve both binding functions. Furthermore, insights into the cooperativity between mutations allowed us to identify fold-stabilizing mutations in the CDRs. The data obtained from deep mutational scanning reveal that the majority of the 52 CDR residues are utilized differently for the two antigen binding function and permit, for the first time, the engineering of several DAF variants with sub-nanomolar affinity against two structurally unrelated antigens. The improved variants show similar blocking activity of receptor binding as the high affinity mono-specific antibodies against these two proteins, demonstrating the feasibility of generating a dual specificity binding surface with comparable properties to individual high affinity mono-specific antibodies. 
Wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a potentially blinding eye disease that causes vision loss among individuals > 50 years old. The main goal in the treatment of wet AMD is to inhibit the choroidal neovascularization (CNV). Currently, ranibizumab and aflibercept are two available anti-VEGF drug for the treatment of wet AMD. Here, we reviewed the clinical outcome of treatment with ranibizumab or aflibercept in patients with wet AMD from recent studies with a special focus on eyes with unusual presentations or treatment resistant and compared these agents with other available wet AMD therapies.
For this review, a literature search from 2011 to present was performed using the following terms (or combination of terms): anti-vascular endothelial growth factors, anti-VEGF, age-related macular degeneration, AMD, aflibercept, and ranibizumab. The studies were limited to studies used ranibizumab, and especially those switched from ranibizumab to aflibercept. Also the clinical trial website (www.clinicaltrials.gov) was searched for recently completed trials of aflibercept or ranibizumab for wet AMD treatment.
Ranibizumab and aflibercept are effective for the treatment of wet AMD including those with retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) and CNV unresponsive to other anti-VEGF agents. Although high-dose ranibizumab has the potential to treat unresponsive CNV, switching to another anti-VEGF agent may be a preferable option in these eyes.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a progressive disease of the central retina and the main cause of legal blindness in industrialized countries. Risk to develop the disease is conferred by both individual as well as genetic factors with the latter being increasingly deciphered over the last decade. Therapeutically, striking advances have been made for the treatment of the neovascular form of late stage AMD while for the late stage atrophic form of the disease, which accounts for almost half of the visually impaired, there is currently no effective therapy on the market. This review highlights our current knowledge on the genetic architecture of early and late stage AMD and explores its potential for the discovery of novel, target-guided treatment options. We reflect on current clinical and experimental therapies for all forms of AMD and specifically note a persisting lack of efficacy for treatment in atrophic AMD. We further explore the current insight in AMD-associated genes and pathways and critically question whether this knowledge is suited to design novel treatment options. Specifically, we point out that known genetic factors associated with AMD govern the risk to develop disease and thus may not play a role in its severity or progression. Treatments based on such knowledge appear appropriate rather for prevention than treatment of manifest disease. As a consequence, future research in AMD needs to be greatly focused on approaches relevant to the patients and their medical needs. 
A realistic description of visual symptoms associated with dry age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is important for raising awareness of the condition and educating patients. This study aimed to develop a set of descriptors for dry AMD and examine the realism of images currently and frequently used to show visual symptoms of the condition.
Volunteers with dry AMD with a range of disease severity were given an eye examination and were asked to describe visual symptoms of their condition in a conversational interview. Participants were also asked to comment on a photograph typically used to portray the visual symptoms of AMD. Interviews were audio recorded, transcribed and subjected to content analysis.
Twenty-nine participants were interviewed. Median (interquartile range [IQR]) age was 75 (70, 79) years. Median (IQR) binocular visual acuity (VA) and Pelli-Robson contrast sensitivity (CS) was 0.2 (0.18, 0.36) logMAR and 1.65 (1.50, 1.95) log CS respectively. Three, 17 and nine patients had early, intermediate and late (geographic atrophy, GA) AMD, respectively. The most frequently reported descriptor group was blur (n = 13) followed by missing (n = 10) and distortion (n = 7). We chose the most popular image used to portray the visual symptoms of dry AMD based on an internet search and showed this to 21 participants. Sixteen participants (76% [95% confidence interval 53-92%]), including three out of the seven people with geographic atrophy, unequivocally rejected the realism of the image.
People with dry AMD use a wide range of descriptors for their visual experience. Visual symptoms of dry AMD as portrayed by commonly shown images were not the experience of most people in this study.
To analyze the changes in ganglion cell complex and peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer thickness, in central macular thickness and choroidal thickness on spectral domain optical coherence tomography in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration treated with intravitreal ranibizumab injections.
All consecutive patients with untreated neovascular age-related macular degeneration received loading phase of three monthly intravitreal ranibizumab, followed by retreatments on a pro re nata protocol for 12 months.
changes in ganglion cell complex and retinal nerve fiber layer at the end of follow-up. Secondary outcome: changes in best-corrected visual acuity, central macular thickness, and choroidal thickness at the end of follow-up. Choroidal thickness was measured at 500 μm, 1000 μm, and 1,500 μm intervals nasally, temporally, superiorly, and inferiorly to the fovea, respectively, on horizontal and vertical line scans centered on the fovea.
Twenty-four eyes were included. Ganglion cell complex and peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer thickness did not show statistically significant changes through 12 months (55.6 ± 18.5 and 81.9 ± 9.9 μm at baseline, 52.7 ± 19.3 and 84.6 ± 15.5 μm at month 12, P > 0.05). Central macular thickness showed progressive decrease from baseline to month 12, with maximum reduction at month 3 (P < 0.001). Statistically significant reduction in choroidal thickness was registered in the nasal 500, 1000, and 1,500 μm from the fovea, corresponding to the papillomacular region (from 169.6 ± 45.3 to 153.9 ± 46.9, P < 0.001).
Intravitreal ranibizumab injections did not affect retinal nerve fiber layer and ganglion cell complex thickness in 1-year follow-up. Choroidal thickness in papillomacular area and central macular thickness was significantly reduced at the end of treatment. Further studies, with larger sample, longer follow-up, and greater number of injections, are warranted.
  To investigate the role of inflammation in age-related macular degeneration by measuring the levels of cytokines in the aqueous humour.
  Samples of aqueous humour were collected from 34 patients with age-related macular degeneration and 16 age-matched control subjects undergoing cataract surgery. Age-related macular degeneration stage was determined clinically, before surgery. Levels of cytokines were measured using Luminex X-MAP technology, and positive results were verified by Western blot.
  Age-related macular degeneration was moderate in 18 patients and advanced in 16. The advanced age-related macular degeneration group was further divided into patients with active choroidal neovascularization (n = 7), disciform scar (n = 7) or central geographic atrophy (n = 2). Higher-than-normal levels of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in the aqueous humour were associated with advanced age-related macular degeneration (200 ± 140 pg/mL vs. 100 ± 61 pg/mL; P = 0.03), especially active choroidal neovascularization (255 ± 155 pg/mL; P = 0.02), Western blot analysis verified the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 findings. Patients with disciform scar showed a trend of abnormally high levels of interleukin-12 (p70) (1.7 ± 2.4 pg/mL vs. 0.2 ± 1 pg/mL; P = 0.07), tumour necrosis factor-α (1.8 ± 2.4 pg/mL vs. 0.3 ± 1 pg/mL; P = 0.06) and interleukin-12 (4.7 ± 6.4 pg/mL vs. 1.2 ± 2.1 pg/mL; P = 0.08).
  Elevated levels of inflammation-related cytokines in the aqueous humour in various stages of age-related macular degeneration may suggest a pathogenic role of inflammation. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 may be indicative of the angiogenic phase. Further corroborative studies are required.
To evaluate the knowledge and behaviors of ophthalmologists in Turkey concerning micronutrition support in patients with age related macular degeneration (ARMD).
This study involved 1,845 ophthalmologists. A scientific poll was sent to all participants by email. The survey covered the following: demographic features, subspecialty knowledge about micronutrition preference for prescribing micronutrition to age related macular degeneration patients, and the reason for this preference. If a participant indicated that he or she prescribed micronutrition, the participant was also asked to indicate the source of the treatment and supplemental treatments.
Of 1,845 ophthalmologists, 249 responded to the survey. Of the respondents, 9% (22) never, 43% (107) sometimes, 37% (92) frequently, and 11% (27) always used micronutrition. The most frequent prescribing subgroup was general ophthalmology (22%), followed by the retina-uvea subspecialty (13.9%). The micronutrition prescribing ratio was 54.8% in retina-uvea specialists when the "frequent" and "always" responses were combined. There was no statistically significant difference between subgroups with respect to prescribing micronutrition. Among the ophthalmologists prescribing micronutrition, 57.1% of them did not use the Age-Related Eye Disease Study-1 (AREDS) criteria, and only 31.3% prescribe micronutrition according to AREDS criteria. The results for the general ophthalmologist and retina-uvea specialist subgroups were similar, 56.3% vs 20.2%, and 54.1% vs 36.1%, respectively. Micronutrition was not recommended for the following reasons: expensive (55.4%), low patient expectancy (40%), no effect (30%), and low patient drug compliance (25.4%). Moreover, 55.2% of the clinicians recommended physical activities, dietary changes, and smoking cessation; 7.3% did not recommend these behavioral changes.
This survey demonstrated that micronutrition preference in age related macular degeneration was low in ophthalmologists in Turkey. Additionally, retina specialists have a lower rate of prescribing micronutrition. Micronutrition support and behavior such as smoking cessation, dietary changes, etc. should be recommended more often to patients with age related macular degeneration.
To evaluate a telemedicine model to follow up patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration and compare the time spent using this model with the time spent conducting office examinations.
Results of office and telemedicine evaluations were compared to determine whether patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration previously treated with intravitreal injections needed additional treatment. The office examinations included visual acuity measurement, fundus examination, and optical coherence tomography. The telemedicine evaluation included evaluation of retinography images, optical coherence tomography images, and visual acuity data obtained in the office. We also measured the time spent on telemedicine evaluations and compared it with the time spent on office examinations.
Twenty-one patients were included. A comparison of office and remote diagnostic decisions showed the same results in 181 cases. Among the 20 remaining patients and considering office diagnostic decisions as the gold standard, 17 (8%) patients had false-positive diagnoses and 3 (1%) had false-negative diagnoses. The sensitivity and specificity of the telemedicine evaluations were 96% and 85%, respectively. The average time spent on remote evaluations was 1 minute 21 seconds compared with 10 minutes spent on office examination (P < 0.001).
The telemedicine model can be a useful alternative for following up patients with age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is the leading cause of blindness in developed world but there are still much unknown facts about the disease itself. Age, genetic factors and smoking are the three main risk factors for the development of ARMD, but the exact pathophysiological
mechanism of the disease remains unknown. Current high resolution optical coherence tomography devices provide ample new information on retinal layers, drusen characteristics and their interaction. In this study, we analyzed 44 eyes with drusiform dry ARMD using high resolution optical
coherence tomography over a 2-year period. Our results showed a statistically significant increase in drusen number in both females and males in the 2-year period. On average, increment by 4 and 5 drusen per eye during the 2-year period was recorded in female and male patients with drusiform dry
ARMD, respectively. Also, statistical analysis of the central retinal thickness showed that women with drusiform dry ARMD had a statistically significantly thinner macula than their male counterparts.
Systemic VEGF inhibition disrupts endothelial homeostasis and accelerates the atherogenesis, suggesting that these events contribute to the clinical cardiovascular adverse events of VEGF-inhibiting therapies. The objective of the current study was to analyze the effect of anti-VEGF therapy on cardiovascular risk factors in patients with exudative age related macular degeneration. A total of 73 patients with exudative age related macular degeneration (without previous anti-VEGF therapy) were treated with two anti-VEGF: Ranibizumab and Pegaptanib sodium. The follow up was 6 months. The following parameters were determined before and after treatment: homocysteine, lipids (total cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL-c, LDL-c), C-Reactive Protein and fibrinogen. There were not statistically significant differences in parameters studied before and after treatment with both Pegaptanib sodium and Ranibizumab, except C-Reactive Protein. Of all patients analyzed, only 3 of them have initially C-Reactive Protein levels above normal levels and after antiangiogenic therapy, there was a significant increase in C-Reactive Protein. We have not found results in our study who to suspect that treatment with anti-VEGF in the patients with exudative age related macular degeneration increases cardiovascular risk predictors. However, after therapy was increased the CRP and fibrinogen may mean that anti-VEGF contribute an alteration of endothelial homeostasis in exudative AMD. 
To assess the 5-year progression from unilateral to bilateral age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and associated risk factors.
Pooled data analyses of three prospective population-based cohorts, the Blue Mountains Eye Study, Beaver Dam Eye Study and Rotterdam Study.
Retinal photography and interview with comprehensive questionnaires were conducted at each visit of three studies. AMD was assessed following the modified Wisconsin AMD grading protocol. Progression to bilateral any (early and late) or late AMD was assessed among participants with unilateral involvement only. Factors associated with the progression were assessed using logistic regression models while simultaneously adjusting for other significant risk factors.
In any 5-year duration, 19-28% of unilateral any AMD cases became bilateral and 27-68% of unilateral late AMD became bilateral. Factors associated with the progression to bilateral involvement of any AMD were age (per year increase, adjusted OR 1.07), carrying risk alleles of the <i>complement factor H</i> and <i>age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2</i> genes (compared with none, OR 1.76 for 1 risk allele and OR 3.34 for 2+ risk alleles), smoking (compared with non-smokers, OR 1.64 for past and OR 1.67 for current smokers), and the presence of large drusen area or retinal pigmentary abnormalities in the first eye.
One in four to one in five unilateral any AMD cases, and up to one in two unilateral late AMD cases, progressed to bilateral in 5 years. Known AMD risk factors, including smoking, are significantly associated with the progression to bilateral involvement.
The approval of aflibercept for the neovascular form of age-related macular degeneration has opened up the possibility of treating patients with fewer injections, since the drug can be administered once every two months. Aflibercept can also be used as rescue therapy in patients with suboptimal response to other antiangiogenic treatments. The present study reviews the scientific evidence on aflibercept, both in treatment-naïve patients and in those with an unsatisfactory response to conventional treatments. 
This retrospective cohort study utilized 3 imaging modalities to analyze quantitatively reticular pseudodrusen (RPD) area changes in eyes that progressed from early to late age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Subjects with AMD, unilateral choroidal neovascularization (CNV), and early AMD with RPD in the fellow eye (the study eye) were included. The study eyes underwent indocyanine green angiography (ICGA), near-infrared reflectance (NIR-R), and short-wavelength autofluorescence (AF) imaging of the macula at baseline and at follow-up. Study eyes were analyzed for RPD and for the development of late AMD-CNV and/or geographic atrophy (GA). RPD area was measured at baseline and at follow-up as a percentage of the 30-degree field.
During the study period (mean follow-up time 23.5 ± 5.0 months), 12/31 study eyes developed CNV and 4/31 developed GA. In the eyes that developed CNV, there was a statistically significant decrease in mean RPD area over the follow-up period as seen on AF (P < 0.01) and NIR-R (P = 0.01), and the decrease in mean RPD area approached statistical significance on ICGA (P = 0.08).
Using 3 en face imaging techniques, we demonstrate that RPD undergo dynamic spatiotemporal changes in eyes that progress from early AMD to CNV, namely a decrease in the area of lesions detected.
Increasing evidence demonstrates that inflammation and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is implicated in the development and progression of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a multifactorial neurodegenerative disease. However the cross talk between these cellular mechanisms has not been clearly and fully understood. The present study investigates a possible intersection between ER stress and inflammation in AMD. In this study, we recruited two collections of involved protein markers to retrieve their interaction information from IMEx-curated databases, which are the most well- known protein-protein interaction collections, allowing us to design an intersection network for AMD that is unprecedented. In order to find expression activated subnetworks, we utilized AMD expression profiles in our network. In addition, we studied topological characteristics of the most expressed active subnetworks to identify the hubs. With regard to topological quantifications and expressional activity, we reported a list of the most pivotal hubs which are potentially applicable as probable therapeutic targets. Furthermore, we introduced MAPK signaling pathway as a significantly involved pathway in the association between ER stress and inflammation, leading to promising new directions in discovering AMD formation mechanisms and possible treatments.
To determine the association between serum levels of apolipoprotein E, leptin, complimentary factor H and high temperature requirement A-1 in patients with age-related macular degeneration.
This case-control study was conducted at the Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan, from May to October 2013, and comprised patients with age-related macular degeneration and matching controls. The confirmation of age-related macular degeneration was carried out through slit lamp examination, fundoscopy and ocular coherence tomography. The selected subjects were not suffering with any other systemic or ophthalmic complication(s). Serum apolipoprotein E, leptin, complimentary factor H and high temperature requirement A-1 were estimated in serum samples of all subjects. SPSS 18 was used for data analysis.
Of the 190 participants, 90(47.4%) were patients with age-related macular degeneration and 100(52.6%) were controls. Significantly elevated serum apolipoprotein E (p<0.0024) and high temperature requirement A-1 (p<0.0001) levels were observed in the patients, while serum leptin (p<0.008) and complimentary factor H (p<0.0001) levels were significantly reduced. Logistic regression showed that lower leptin (p<0.026) and elevated high temperature requirement A-1 (p<0.0001) were the relevant risk factors.
Serum apolipoprotein E, leptin, complimentary factor H and high temperature requirement A-1 levels were altered in age-related macular degeneration patients.
Prostate cancer (PC) can be related to increased systemic oxidative stress and dihydrotestosterone level, which are also reported to be involved in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). We conducted a cohort study to determine whether patients with PC have an increased risk of AMD.
Data were collected from the Taiwan Longitudinal Health Insurance Database for the 1999-2010 period. The study PC cohort comprised 22 084 patients aged ≥18 years with a first diagnosis of PC. The comparison cohort consisted of age-, occupation-, and urbanization level-matched patients at a ratio of 1 : 1. The primary outcome was the incidence of AMD, which was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and proportional hazards modeling.
The mean follow-up periods (standard deviation) for the patients with AMD in the age-, occupation-, and urbanization level-matched PC cohort and non-PC cohorts were 4.69 (2.90) and 5.51 (2.82) years. The mean age of the PC cohort was 73.9 years and that of the non-PC cohort was 73.2 years, with approximately 85.9% of the patients aged >65 years. The PC cohort had a higher risk of AMD than did the propensity score-matched non-PC cohort with an adjusted hazard ratio of 1.25 (95% confidence interval, 1.12-1.39). Compared with PC cohort receiving no injection hormone therapy, the PC cohort receiving injection hormone therapy had a lower risk of AMD (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.56; 95% confidence interval, 0.41-0.76).
PC is associated with an increased risk of AMD. Patients with PC receiving injected form of androgen deprivation therapy had a lower risk of AMD than patients with PC not receiving injected form of androgen-deprivation therapy.
To compare the effects of converting to aflibercept therapy with continuing ranibizumab therapy in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration requiring monthly ranibizumab treatment.
Patients were selected from the 104 patients (115 eyes) already enrolled in an "Observe and Plan" prospective case series that included treating neovascular age-related macular degeneration with ranibizumab for 24 months. Patients who still needed monthly retreatment at the end of a 2-year study were randomized to either continue ranibizumab therapy or to convert to aflibercept therapy. Outcome measures included average interval between treatments, resolution of exudative signs, number of retreatments, and change in visual acuity over 12 months (the third treatment year).
Nineteen patients (21 eyes) met the inclusion criteria. Ten eyes were randomized to receive aflibercept, and 11 eyes remained on ranibizumab. Groups were balanced for baseline characteristics. Outcomes were similar in the 2 groups over a 12-month study duration, with no statistical difference.
This comparative pilot study suggests that neovascular age-related macular degeneration requiring monthly retreatment with ranibizumab may respond in similar ways to both ranibizumab and aflibercept treatment. Larger sample sizes would be needed to confirm this observation.
To compare the ability of several visual functional tests in terms of the strength of their associations with the earliest phases of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), which bears on their potential to serve as functional endpoints in evaluating treatments for early AMD and prevention strategies.
Eyes from adults ≥60 years old were identified as being in normal macular health or in the earliest stages of AMD (steps 2, 3 or 4) through grading of color stereo-fundus photos by an experienced grader masked to all other study variables who used the 9-step Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) classification system for AMD severity. Visual function was assessed using the following tests: best-corrected visual acuity, low luminance visual acuity, spatial contrast sensitivity, macular cone-mediated light sensitivity and rod-mediated dark adaptation.
A total of 1260 eyes were tested from 640 participants; 1007 eyes were in normal macular health (defined as step 1 in AREDS system) and 253 eyes had early AMD (defined as steps 2, 3 or 4). Adjusting for age and gender, early AMD eyes had two times the odds of having delayed rod-mediated dark adaptation than eyes in normal macular health (p = 0.0019). Visual acuity, low luminance acuity, spatial contrast sensitivity and macular light sensitivity did not differ between normal eyes and early AMD eyes.
Eyes in the earliest phases of AMD were two times more likely to have delayed rod-mediated dark adaptation, as assessed by the rod-intercept, as compared to older eyes in normal macular health, whereas there was no difference in early AMD versus normal eyes in tests of visual acuity, low luminance acuity, macular light sensitivity and spatial contrast sensitivity.
To evaluate the development of intraretinal cystoid lesions (ICLs) in eyes with intermediate age-related macular degeneration.
Serial multimodal retinal imaging data of 105 eyes from 87 age-related macular degeneration subjects (median age of 75.0 years) with no late age-related macular degeneration at baseline from the prospective longitudinal natural history "molecular diagnostic of age-related macular degeneration-study" were included. The presence of ICLs-defined as lacunar hyporeflective areas within the neurosensory retina-was determined by spectral-domain optical coherence tomography at Month 24. Both baseline and further follow-up data were additionally evaluated.
At Month 24, ICLs were identified in 12 of 105 (11.7%) eyes of which 4 had developed signs of choroidal neovascularization since baseline. Intraretinal cystoid lesions in these four eyes with choroidal neovascularization were mostly found at the level of the outer nuclear layer. Intraretinal cystoid lesions in the remaining 8 eyes occurred mainly at the level of the inner nuclear layer, showed smaller horizontal and vertical dimensions, and were not spatially confined to an increase in retinal thickness.
The results indicate that ICLs may develop also in the absence of active neovascularization. Distinctive morphologic features and localization of ICLs may be indicative of different underlying pathogenetic mechanisms. If no manifest choroidal neovascularization can be established in the presence of ICLs, close monitoring as well as awareness and self-monitoring seem to be advisable.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the main cause of blindness. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor is used to prevent further neovascularization due to wet AMD. The purpose of this systematic review was to investigate the effect and protocol of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment on wet AMD.
A comprehensive literature search was performed in PubMed, Embase, the Cochrane Library, CNKI, and reference lists. Meta-analysis was performed using Stata12.0 software, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), retinal thickness, and lesion size were evaluated.
Twelve randomized controlled trials spanning from 2010 to 2014 and involving 5,225 patients were included. A significant difference was observed between the intravitreal ranibizumab (IVR) group and the intravitreal bevacizumab group (standard mean difference = -0.14, 95% confidence interval [CI] = -0.23 to -0.05). No significant differences were observed in best corrected VA, retinal thickness, or lesion size between IVR and the intravitreal aflibercept group. Compared to monthly injection, IVR as-needed injections (PRN) can raise VA by 1.97 letters (weighted mean difference = 1.97, 95% CI = 0.14-3.794). Combination therapy of IVR and photodynamic therapy can significantly raise VA by 2.74 letters when combined with IVR monotherapy (weighted mean difference = 2.74, 95% CI = 0.26-5.21).
The superiority remains unclear between IVR and intravitreal bevacizumab in the treatment of neovascular AMD. Intravitreal aflibercept dosed every 2 months required fewer injection times, but produced similar efficacy as monthly IVR. IVR PRN could significantly increase VA. Combined with photodynamic therapy, IVR therapy could also increase VA effectively.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-β/δ (PPARβ/δ) is a nuclear receptor that regulates differentiation, inflammation, lipid metabolism, extracellular matrix remodeling, and angiogenesis in multiple tissues. These pathways are also central to the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the leading cause of vision loss globally. With the goal of identifying signaling pathways that may be important in the development of AMD, we investigated the impact of PPARβ/δ activation on ocular tissues affected in the disease. PPARβ/δ is expressed and can be activated in AMD vulnerable cells, including retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) and choroidal endothelial cells. Further, PPARβ/δ knockdown modulates AMD-related pathways selectively. Specifically, genetic ablation of <i>Pparβ/δ</i> in aged mice resulted in exacerbation of several phenotypic features of early dry AMD, but attenuation of experimentally induced choroidal neovascular (CNV) lesions. Antagonizing PPARβ/δ in both <i>in vitro</i> angiogenesis assays and in the <i>in vivo</i> experimentally induced CNV model, inhibited angiogenesis and angiogenic pathways, while ligand activation of PPARβ/δ, <i>in vitro</i>, decreased RPE lipid accumulation, characteristic of dry AMD. This study demonstrates for the first time, selective regulation of a nuclear receptor in the eye and establishes that selective targeting of PPARβ/δ may be a suitable strategy for treatment of different clinical sub-types of AMD.
Physiologically, the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) expresses immunosuppressive signals such as FAS ligand (FASL), which prevents the accumulation of leukocytes in the subretinal space. Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is associated with a breakdown of the subretinal immunosuppressive environment and chronic accumulation of mononuclear phagocytes (MPs). We show that subretinal MPs in AMD patients accumulate on the RPE and express high levels of APOE. MPs of Cx3cr1(-/-) mice that develop MP accumulation on the RPE, photoreceptor degeneration, and increased choroidal neovascularization similarly express high levels of APOE. ApoE deletion in Cx3cr1(-/-) mice prevents pathogenic age- and stress-induced subretinal MP accumulation. We demonstrate that increased APOE levels induce IL-6 in MPs via the activation of the TLR2-CD14-dependent innate immunity receptor cluster. IL-6 in turn represses RPE FasL expression and prolongs subretinal MP survival. This mechanism may account, in part, for the MP accumulation observed in Cx3cr1(-/-) mice. Our results underline the inflammatory role of APOE in sterile inflammation in the immunosuppressive subretinal space. They provide rationale for the implication of IL-6 in AMD and open avenues toward therapies inhibiting pathogenic chronic inflammation in late AMD. 
To report 2-year treatment outcomes with intravitreal aflibercept for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) in routine clinical practice.
Retrospective, nonrandomized, interventional case series.
Retrospective analysis of electronic medical record (EMR) notes (OpenEyes) and paper case notes and review of spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SDOCT) imaging of patients with consecutively treated eyes with previously untreated nAMD. Patients were commenced on aflibercept injections in 1 or both eyes from October 1, 2013 to December 31, 2013. Data including age, sex, visual acuity (VA) measured on Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study charts, injection episodes, and complications were recorded. Additionally, SDOCT data, including presence or absence of macular fluid and automated central subfield macular thickness (CSMT) at year 1 and 2, were recorded.
Of the 109 eyes of 102 patients treated, data from 94 eyes of 88 patients were available at 2-year follow-up (86% of patients). In the analysis of 2-year outcomes, there were 58 women (65.9%); the mean (± standard deviation) age was 77.5 ± 8 years. Over the 2 years, these eyes received a median of 12 (mean, 11.4 ± 4) injections at a median of 100 (mean, 99.3 ± 5.3) weeks of follow-up. The mean VA changed from 55.9 ± 15 letters at baseline to 61.3 ± 16.9 letters (VA gain 5.4 letters) at 1 year and to 61 ± 17.1 letters (VA gain 5.1 ± 14.9 letters) at 2 years. The reduction in CSMT was 79 μm with absence of macular fluid in 72.7% of the 88 eyes with SDOCT data available at 2-year follow-up.
The VA and SDOCT results compare favorably with outcomes seen in randomized controlled trials. The results suggest that good long-term outcomes can be achieved using aflibercept for nAMD in clinical settings.
To describe visual outcome and prognostic indicators in neovascular age-related macular degeneration with advanced visual loss at the initiation of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy.
A retrospective chart review was performed on a consecutive series of 1,410 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy at the Medical College of Wisconsin. Subjects were included if at the initiation of therapy they had 20/200 or worse visual acuity (VA) with no other visually limiting eye disease and a minimum follow-up of 6 months. The change in VA at 6 months and 12 months was assessed compared with baseline. Visual improvement/worsening was defined as at least ± 0.3 logMAR (equivalent to 15 ETDRS [Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study] letters) change. Other factors for analysis included number of injections received, drug type, and various clinical and imaging findings.
One hundred thirty-one cases met the study criteria, and 97 were followed for 12 months. Baseline VA was 1.38 logMAR (20/480 Snellen equivalent). Mean VA change (logMAR) consisted of an improvement of 0.23 (P < 0.0001) at 6 months and 0.17 (P = 0.003) at 12 months. At 12 months, VA improved in 45% and worsened in 20%. Among subjects with baseline VA worse than 20/400, VA improved in 57% and worsened in 20%. On univariate analysis at either the 6 months or 12 months follow-up, visual improvement was associated with retinal hemorrhage (P = 0.03) and subretinal fluid (P = 0.02), whereas visual worsening was associated with retinal pigment epithelial detachment (P = 0.04) and intraretinal fluid (P = 0.01). With multivariate analysis, visual improvement was predicted by both a larger number of injections received (P = 0.001) and a poorer baseline VA (P = 0.001). Injection medication type did not influence outcome.
Statistically significant visual improvement was observed in association with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy in patients with severe neovascular age-related macular degeneration, even in patients whose initial VA was worse than that studied in large anti-vascular endothelial growth factor clinical trials. Numerous clinically discernable or potentially modifiable factors may influence outcome in such patients.
To pool the results of published data regarding association of ARMS2/LOC387715 A69S, CFH Y402H and CFH I62V genotypes with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) with and without reticular pseudodrusen (RPD). The results of this pooled data used to estimate the contribution of each of these genes in the pathogenesis of RPD. Heterogeneity of studies was evaluated using Cochran Q-test and I<sup>2</sup> index. To modify the heterogeneity in the variables, we used the random effects model. Meta-analysis was performed using STATA. Odds ratio (OR) of genotypes in each study was calculated. Six studies of AMD with RPD and AMD without RPD cases included in this analysis. Analysis of pooled data showed that risk genotypes frequency of ARMS2 A69S was significantly different between AMD with RPD and AMD without RPD [OR = 1.82, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.26-2.63 for GT versus GG ARMS2 A69S; OR = 2.40, 95% CI: 1.50-3.84 for TT versus GG ARMS2 A69S]. Further analysis also showed that the risk genotype frequency of CFH Y402H was not significantly different between these two groups (OR = 1.02, 95% CI: 0.69-1.50 for CT versus TT CFH Y402H; OR = 1.09, 95% CI: 0.74-1.60 for CC versus TT CFH Y402H). Comparison of above-mentioned ORs revealed statistically higher values for GT and TT genotypes of ARMS2 A69S compared with CFH Y402H genotypes (p = 0.011, p = 0.014, respectively).Our analysis showed stronger contribution of ARMS2 in AMD with RPD group versus AMD without RPD group, in comparison with CFH genotypes.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a devastating disease characterized by central vision loss in elderly individuals. Previous studies have suggested a link between elevated levels of total C-reactive protein (CRP) in the choroid, CFH genotype, and AMD status; however, the structural form of CRP present in the choroid, its relationship to CFH genotype, and its functional consequences have not been assessed. In this report, we studied genotyped human donor eyes (n = 60) and found that eyes homozygous for the high-risk CFH (Y402H) allele had elevated monomeric CRP (mCRP) within the choriocapillaris and Bruch's membrane, compared to those with the low-risk genotype. Treatment of choroidal endothelial cells in vitro with mCRP increased migration rate and monolayer permeability compared to treatment with pentameric CRP (pCRP) or medium alone. Organ cultures treated with mCRP exhibited dramatically altered expression of inflammatory genes as assessed by RNA sequencing, including ICAM-1 and CA4, both of which were confirmed at the protein level. Our data indicate that mCRP is the more abundant form of CRP in human choroid, and that mCRP levels are elevated in individuals with the high-risk CFH genotype. Moreover, pro-inflammatory mCRP significantly affects endothelial cell phenotypes in vitro and ex vivo, suggesting a role for mCRP in choroidal vascular dysfunction in AMD. Copyright © 2016 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
To assess the efficacy of a combination therapy of intravitreal ranibizumab together with a dexamethasone implant in comparison with ranibizumab monotherapy in neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Forty eyes of recurrent or persistent neovascular age-related macular degeneration were included in this prospective study. Patients were randomly assigned to two groups. Based on a pro re nata treatment regimen, the first group received intravitreal ranibizumab monotherapy (IVM). The second group received a combination of intravitreal dexamethasone implant and ranibizumab (intravitreal combination [IVC]) at baseline and was retreated with ranibizumab as needed. A second dexamethasone implant was allowed for retreatment after at least 6 months. Retreatment criteria included evidence of subretinal fluid, cystoid macular edema or new hemorrhage, and/or a visual acuity decrease of 5 Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study letters.
During 12 months, a mean of 7.95/5.5 (IVM/IVC; P = 0.042) retreatments were given. The median time until first retreatment differed significantly between the groups (P = 0.004). Functional variables could be maintained in both groups with no differences between them. Visual acuity changed from 62 letters at baseline to 67 at Month 12 in the IVM and remained stable at 68 letters in the IVC group (P = 0.68); macular sensitivity changed from 6.95 dB to 7.01 dB in IVM and from 7.24 dB to 7.12 dB in IVC (P = 0.4). Central retinal thickness decreased, however, with no difference between the groups (P = 0.38). In the IVM/IVC group, 11/12 (55/60%) patients were phakic at the time of study entry. One (9%) patient from the IVM and 4 (33%) from the IVC group were referred to cataract surgery after study completion (P = 0.4).
This pilot study indicates combined therapy to delay retreatment in patients with persistent/recurrent neovascular age-related macular degeneration and an overall reduction in required ranibizumab retreatments compared with ranibizumab monotherapy with consistent functional outcomes.
To compare the areas of choriocapillaris (CC) nonperfusion and macular atrophy (MA) in treated exudative age-related macular degeneration.
This was a prospective, observational, cross-sectional study. Forty-four eyes exhibiting MA (42 patients with age-related macular degeneration), with a dry macula, underwent fundus autofluorescence and optical coherence tomography angiography. The area of MA detected by fundus autofluorescence and CC nonperfusion detected by optical coherence tomography angiography was measured using image analysis software. The rates of concordance between the MA and CC nonperfusion areas were calculated. We qualitatively and quantitatively compared the areas of MA and CC nonperfusion in age-related macular degeneration eyes.
The mean areas of MA and CC nonperfusion were 5.95 ± 4.50 mm and 10.66 ± 7.05 mm, respectively (paired t-test, P < 0.001). In 39 eyes (88.6%), the CC nonperfusion area was larger than the MA area, and the mean CC nonperfusion area was significantly larger than the mean MA area. Fundus autofluorescence matching optical coherence tomography angiography showed that the CC nonperfusion area was almost included in the MA area. The mean concordance rate for the MA area inside the CC nonperfusion area was 87.7 ± 13.9%.
The MA and CC nonperfusion areas markedly overlapped. The area of CC nonperfusion correlated with the MA area. Choroidal ischemia might be involved in the pathogenesis of MA in treated age-related macular degeneration.This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CCBY), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
To investigate the correlation of foveal microstructural changes with vision after intravitreal ranibizumab injection in eye with choroidal neovascularization (CNV) secondary to age-related macular degeneration.
We retrospectively studied 40 eyes of 40 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration who had no previous treatment history of age-related macular degeneration. All patients were treated with 3 monthly intravitreal ranibizumab (0.5 mg/0.05 mL) injections. One month after the third consecutive injection, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was evaluated and the eyes were categorized into 2 groups according to the change in BCVA (good function group: BCVA improvement ≥ logarithm of minimum angle of resolution 0.3; poor function group: BCVA improvement < logarithm of minimum angle of resolution 0.3). Changes of foveal photoreceptor layer integrity, CNV size (diameter and thickness), central macular thickness, center point thickness, outer nuclear layer thickness, and subretinal fluid in each group were also evaluated using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography.
The good function group is 20 eyes, and the poor function group is 20 eyes. No significant differences in baseline characteristics of variables including CNV type, initial BCVA, photoreceptor integrity, and CNV size were observed between the two groups. Best-corrected visual acuity in the good function group was 0.30 ± 0.17 (logarithm of minimum angle of resolution) and that in the poor function group was 0.48 ± 0.40 (logarithm of minimum angle of resolution). Decreased disrupted length of photoreceptor layer (1,020.80 ± 974.60) and decreased CNV thickness (78.86 ± 50.78) were found in the good function group at the end of follow-up. However, no significant differences in changes of CNV diameter, central macular thickness, center point thickness, outer nuclear layer thickness, and resolution of subretinal fluid were observed between the two groups.
Restoration of foveal photoreceptor integrity and decreased CNV thickness are closely associated with visual improvement in neovascular age-related macular degeneration after treatment.
The aim of this research was to study the overall restoration effect on residual retinal cells through surgically grafted autologous cells onto the surrounding tissue, choroid and retina in order to produce a constant secretion of growth factors (GFs) in dry age-related macular degeneration (AMD) patients.
6 months after surgery, several values were statistically significant in the group with higher RTA. Also patient compliance analysis (PCA) in relation to functional change perception appeared to be very good.
Thirty-six eyes of 25 patients (range 64-84 years of age) affected by dry AMD were included in study, and divided in two groups by spectral domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT): group A with retinal thickness average (RTA) less than 250 microns (µm) and group B with RTA equal to or more than 250 µm. Adipocytes, adipose-derived stem cells from the stromal-vascular fraction, and platelets from platelet-rich plasma were implanted in the suprachoroidal space. Particularly, the following parameters were evaluated: best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) for far and near distance, retinal thickness maps, scotopic and photopic electroretinogram (ERG), and microperimetry (MY). All statistical analyses were performed with STATA 14.0 (Collage Station, Texas, USA).
The available set of GFs allowed biological retinal neuroenhancement. After 6 months it improved visual performance (VP), but the increase was better if RTA recorded by OCT was higher, probably in relation to the presence of areas with greater cellularity.
To estimate the prevalence of wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in Singapore in the year 2030. This projection will help in planning appropriate care provision and build health services capacity to cater to the increasing healthcare demand in 2030.
The number of AMD patients aged 40-79 years from all Singaporeans was estimated using prevalence rates from a local study and using the United Nations population projections for Singapore to 2030. Age-specific mortality was accounted for. Additionally, two main scenarios were presented: (1) Projected number of wet AMD cases if patients were not taking preventive antioxidant vitamins; (2) projected number of wet AMD cases if patients were taking preventive antioxidant vitamins. Based on these scenarios, the economic burden was calculated. The number of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) gained as a result of improvement in visual acuity (VA) due to anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) treatment was also calculated.
An estimated growth of 42% in the number of wet AMD cases is expected by 2030. The estimated economic burden of wet AMD in 2030 for scenarios 1 and 2 is Singapore $203.1 million and $162.9 million, respectively. The QALYs gained as a result of improved VA from wet AMD treatment ranged from 10,114.4 to 14,058.8 over a 5-year period for the 2030 cohort.
The burden of wet AMD is set to increase over the next 15 years. Appropriate measures to build healthcare capacity and plan for this expected surge in patients should be a priority in Singapore.
To assess the effect of switching patients previously incompletely treated with ranibizumab (RBZ) to aflibercept (AFL) using a pro re nata (PRN) treatment strategy in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nvAMD).
A retrospective case series was conducted on patients who had persistent or recurrent intra- and/or sub-retinal fluid treated initially with RBZ and subsequently switched to AFL. The main outcome measures were best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and central retinal thickness (CRT) measured at different stages of the study. Friedman analysis of variance and Wilcoxon test were used to examine differences in BCVA and CRT.
Two hundred and seven eyes from 182 patients were included. BCVA and CRT improved significantly initially following 3 RBZ injections with a mean gain of 3.7 letters (p < 0.001) and a mean loss of 69 μm (p < 0.001) respectively. Following PRN RBZ therapy and immediately prior to switching to AFL (mean 129 weeks), there was a mean loss of 6.7 letters (p < 0.001) BCVA and a mean gain of 24 μm (p < 0.001) CRT. AFL loading resulted in a mean improvement of 0.7 letters (p = 0.28) BCVA and 55 μm (p < 0.001) CRT. At final follow-up following AFL PRN therapy (mean 85 weeks), there was a mean loss of 8.9 letters (p < 0.001) BCVA and a mean gain of 12 μm (p < 0.05) CRT.
AFL loading resulted in a significant anatomical improvement but no significant change in visual acuity. However, the benefits of switching were gradually lost over time with AFL PRN dosing despite an increased injection rate when compared with RBZ PRN treatment.
Not applicable.
Genome-wide association studies provide important insights to the genetic component of disease risks. However, an existing challenge is how to incorporate collective effects of interactions beyond the level of independent single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) tests. While methods considering each SNP pair separately have provided insights, a large portion of expected heritability may reside in higher-order interaction effects.
We describe an inference approach (discrete discriminant analysis; DDA) designed to probe collective interactions while treating both genotypes and phenotypes as random variables. The genotype distributions in case and control groups are modeled separately based on empirical allele frequency and covariance data, whose differences yield disease risk parameters. We compared pairwise tests and collective inference methods, the latter based both on DDA and logistic regression. Analyses using simulated data demonstrated that significantly higher sensitivity and specificity can be achieved with collective inference in comparison to pairwise tests, and with DDA in comparison to logistic regression. Using age-related macular degeneration (AMD) data, we demonstrated two possible applications of DDA. In the first application, a genome-wide SNP set is reduced into a small number (∼100) of variants via filtering and SNP pairs with significant interactions are identified. We found that interactions between SNPs with highest AMD association were epigenetically active in the liver, adipocytes, and mesenchymal stem cells. In the other application, multiple groups of SNPs were formed from the genome-wide data and their relative strengths of association were compared using cross-validation. This analysis allowed us to discover novel collections of loci for which interactions between SNPs play significant roles in their disease association. In particular, we considered pathway-based groups of SNPs containing up to ∼10, 000 variants in each group. In addition to pathways related to complement activation, our collective inference pointed to pathway groups involved in phospholipid synthesis, oxidative stress, and apoptosis, consistent with the AMD pathogenesis mechanism where the dysfunction of retinal pigment epithelium cells plays central roles.
The simultaneous inference of collective interaction effects within a set of SNPs has the potential to reveal novel aspects of disease association.
Understanding the link between ethnicity and health is critical to making appropriate public policy decisions. Few population-level data are available about this connection, however, including the influence of ethnicity on the association between age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and vision-specific functioning (VSF).
To identify the influence of ethnicity on VSF among Chinese, Malay, and Indian patients with AMD.
This cross-sectional, population-based study relied on patients and their data from 3 population-based studies in 3 ethnic groups: Chinese, Malay and Indian. Of 10 033 Chinese, Malay, and Indian adults who participated in the study, 9962 (99.3%) who had gradable fundus images and Visual Function Index (VF-11) data available were included in the analyses for the present study. Uniocular presenting distance visual acuity was measured using the logMAR chart. Separate multiple linear regression models examined the association between AMD and VSF in the 3 ethnic groups, adjusting for age, sex, presenting visual acuity in the better-seeing eye, educational level, income, smoking status, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, total cholesterol level, and other eye conditions. Data were collected between January 20, 2004, and December 19, 2011; data analysis was conducted between November 12, 2015, and December 28, 2016.
Age-related macular degeneration according to fundus photographs graded using a modified Wisconsin Age-Related Maculopathy Grading System.
Rasch analysis was used to convert VF-11 questionnaire scores to estimated interval measures of VSF.
Of the 9962 participants, the mean (SD) age was 58.8 (10.4) years; 4909 (49.3%) were male; 590 (5.9%) had early AMD (241 Chinese, 161 Malays, and 188 Indians) and 60 (0.6%) had late AMD (25 Chinese, 21 Malays, and 14 Indians). In the adjusted models, compared with no AMD, early AMD was associated with a small reduction in VSF (2.9%; β = -0.12; 95% CI, -0.23 to -0.00; P = .046) in the Chinese group but not in the Indian and Malay groups. Moreover, Chinese participants with late AMD had a clinically significant 19.1% loss of VSF (β = -0.78; 95% CI, -1.13 to -0.43, P < .001). In the Malay group, those with late AMD had a 13.5% drop in VSF (β = -0.49; 95% CI, -1.01 to 0.04; P = .07) compared with their counterparts without AMD. Similarly, late AMD was not associated with VSF in the Indian group.
Early and late AMD negatively affected VSF in Chinese but not in Indian and Malay participants. This finding suggests that there is an independent ethnic influence in the association of the disease with VSF in multiethnic Asian populations, thus warranting ethnicity-based strategies to delay the onset or progression of AMD.
Drusen have been considered the clinical hallmark of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Reticular pseudodrusen (RPD), although first described about 25 years ago, have only been recently recognized as an additional clinical phenotype of AMD with distinct characteristics on multimodal imaging and significant impact on visual function. Eyes with RPD are at greater risk of progression to advanced AMD when compared with eyes with drusen only. RPD can also occur in the absence of drusen. Unlike features external to the retinal pigment epithelium that have received most attention in AMD, evidence suggests that RPD are associated with changes internal to the RPE. Therefore, new avenues regarding the pathogenesis of AMD are highlighted by these recent observations. We summarize the current knowledge regarding the histology, imaging, and functional changes in eyes with RPD in AMD and offer concepts of future research for the AMD community to discuss.
We aimed to compare changes in subfoveal and peripapillary choroidal thickness (CT) after intravitreal aflibercept or ranibizumab injections for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Medical records of 54 treatment-naïve, consecutive patients (54 eyes) who were diagnosed with neovascular AMD and received three monthly injections of aflibercept (21 eyes) or ranibizumab (33 eyes) were reviewed. Subfoveal and peripapillary CT were measured with images obtained using spectral domain optical coherence tomography at baseline and at three months.
Subfoveal CT decreased from 232.2 ± 94.4 μm at baseline to 207.1 ± 89.3 μm at three months in the aflibercept group (p < 0.001) and from 231.5 ± 102.9 μm to 220.0 ± 98.0 μm in the ranibizumab group (p = 0.006). The reduction was greater in the aflibercept group than in the ranibizumab group (p = 0.024). Peripapillary CT decreased from 157.2 ± 62.2 μm at baseline to 147.4 ± 62.2 μm at three months in the aflibercept group (p < 0.001). However, the change in peripapillary CT from 154.9 ± 46.5 μm at baseline to 152.3 ± 50.0 μm at three months was not significant in the ranibizumab group (p = 0.123).
Intravitreally injected aflibercept significantly decreased subfoveal CT more than ranibizumab. Choroidal thinning after aflibercept injection was not limited to the subfoveal area, but extended beyond the macula as well.
To evaluate whether oral beta-blockers (BBs) are associated with a decreased number of intravitreal injections in patients with incident neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
A retrospective cohort study of subjects with a new diagnosis of neovascular age-related macular degeneration was conducted using a medical claims database from a large national US insurer. Two cohorts were created for comparison consisting of patients with regular use of BBs or calcium channel blockers. The main outcome measured was the difference in the mean number of intravitreal injections administered between the two cohorts.
After inclusion and exclusion criteria, 239 BB and 155 calcium channel blocker subjects remained for analysis. Univariate analysis revealed that the mean number of injections in the BB cohort was 6.43 (95% confidence interval [CI] 5.90-6.95) versus 6.55 (95% CI 5.85-7.25) in the calcium channel blocker cohort (P = 0.78). After multivariate adjustment, the mean number of injections in the BB group was 6.32 (95% CI 5.77-6.87) versus 6.71 (95% CI 6.02-7.40) in the calcium channel blocker group. The overall difference between the 2 groups was -0.39 (95% CI difference -1.29 to 0.51; P = 0.40).
The use of oral BBs is not associated with a decreased number of intravitreal injections in incident neovascular age-related macular degeneration patients.
The purpose of our study was to investigate the two-year outcome of Aflibercept treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD), using the Observe-and-Plan regimen, an individually planned treatment regimen, based on the predictability of an individual's need for retreatment, aiming to reduce the clinical burden.
Our prospective study used the Observe-and-Plan regimen with Aflibercept to treat nAMD: Three loading doses, followed by monthly observation visits until the disease-recurrence interval was determined, which then was shortened by 2 weeks in a treatment plan for the next three injections without intermediate monitoring visits. The subsequent treatment plans were adjusted according to periodically assessed disease activity. The primary outcome measures were visual acuity changes, number of injections, and number of monitoring visits.
The study included 112 eyes of 102 patients with a mean age of 80.7 years (SD 7.6). Mean visual acuity (VA) improved from 61.8 ETDRS letters (20/60<sup>+2</sup>) at baseline, by 8.5, 8.0, and 6.2 letters at months 3, 12 and 24, respectively. Mean central retinal thickness was 438um at baseline, and reduced by 152um, 155um, and 150um at months 3, 12 and 24, respectively. The mean number of injections was 8.7 and 6.5 in the first and second year, respectively. The mean number of monitoring visits after baseline was 3.8 and 2.8 during the first and second year, respectively.
The Observe-and-Plan regimen significantly improved VA, while fewer monitoring visits were needed as compared to other variable dosing regimens, thus reducing the workload for chronic care management of nAMD.
To evaluate pentraxin3 (PTX3) levels in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (N-ARMD) and to investigate its role as a predictive biomarker.
Thirty individuals with N-ARMD and 30 controls without N-ARMD were studied. Plasma concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP) and PTX3 were measured in frozen samples using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit.
PTX3 concentration was 1341 ± 625 pg/mL (mean ± standard deviation) in N-ARMD patients, which was significantly higher than in control subjects (887 ± 478, p = 0.003). The mean CRP level was also significantly higher in N-ARMD (2121 ± 2300) than in control (748 ± 618, p = 0.004). Pearson's correlation analysis showed a significant positive correlation between PTX3 and CRP (r = 0.407, p = 0.002).
Our data support the role of chronic inflammation in the development of ARMD. They also show PTX3 may contribute to efforts to understand pathogenesis of N-ARMD.
The aim of this study was to evaluate an incidence of the vitreomacular adhesion in patients with age-related macular degeneration.
We examined 472 eyes in 241 patients (136 W/ 105 M) in age of 54-92 years (mean 62.6 years +/- 8.5) with dry or wet age-related macular degeneration using Cirrus HD-OCT (Zeiss) macular cube 512x128 program or 5-line pro-gram.
Vitreomacular adhesion was observed in 139 eyes with dry age-related macular degeneration (29.4%, p=0.000*), in 101 eyes with drusen (21.4%, p=0.000*), in 38 eyes with retinal pigment epithelium alterations (8%, p=0.202), in 278 eyes with wet age-related macular degeneration (58.9%, p=0.001*), in 21 eyes with pigment epithelial detachment (4.4%, p=0.303), in 161 eyes with choroidal neovascularzation (34. 1%, p=0.031*/ and in 96 eyes with scar (20.4%, p=0.040*).
Probably, vitreomacular adhesion alone is not able to induce age-related macular degeneration, but it may be associated with choroidal neovascularization development, it can contribute to exudate formation and choroidal neovascularization, it may induces or sustains a chronic low-grade inflammation in the macula region.
As the age of the population increases in many nations, age-related degenerative diseases pose significant socioeconomic challenges. One of the key degenerative diseases that compromise quality of life is age-related macular degeneration (AMD). AMD is a multi-faceted condition that affects the central retina, which ultimately leads to blindness in millions of people worldwide. The pathophysiology and risk factors for AMD are complex, and the symptoms manifest in multiple related but distinct forms. The ability to develop effective treatments for AMD will depend on a thorough understanding of the underlying pathophysiology, risk factors, and driver molecular pathways, as well as the ability to develop useful animal models. This review provides an overview of the aforementioned aspects in AMD.
To assess the influence of drug; dosing regimen; and traditional, nontraditional, and genetic risk factors on the incidence of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in the fellow eye of patients treated for CNV with ranibizumab or bevacizumab.
Cohort study of patients enrolled in a multicenter, randomized clinical trial.
Patients with no CNV in the fellow eye at the time of enrollment in the Comparison of Age-Related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials (CATT).
Eligibility criteria for the clinical trial required that study eyes have evidence on fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography of CNV secondary to age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and visual acuity between 20/25 and 20/320. Treatment for the study eye was assigned randomly to either ranibizumab or bevacizumab and to 3 different regimens for dosing over a 2-year period. The genotypes for 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with risk of AMD were determined. Only patients without CNV in the fellow eye at baseline were considered at risk. The CATT ophthalmologists examined patients every 4 weeks through 2 years and recorded treatment for CNV in the fellow eye.
Development of CNV in the fellow eye.
Among 1185 CATT participants, 727 (61%) had no CNV in the fellow eye at enrollment. At 2 years, CNV had developed in 75 (20.6%) of 365 patients treated with ranibizumab and in 60 (16.6%) of 362 patients treated with bevacizumab (absolute difference, 4.0%; 95% confidence interval [CI], -1.7% to 9.6%; P = 0.17). The risk ratio for pro re nata dosing relative to monthly dosing was 1.1 (95% CI, 0.8-1.6). Greater elevation of the retinal pigment epithelium and fluid in the foveal center of the study eye were associated with increased incidence of CNV in the fellow eye. Incidence was not associated with genotype on rs1061170 (CFH), rs10490924 (ARMS2), rs11200638 (HTRA1), and rs2230199 (C3; P>0.35).
Through 2 years, there was no statistically significant difference between ranibizumab and bevacizumab in incidence of CNV in the fellow eye. Genotype on 4 SNPs previously found to be associated with AMD did not affect the risk of CNV in the fellow eye among CATT patients.
Proprietary or commercial disclosure may be found after the references.
In several case-studies improved outcomes have been reported after switching from a pro-re-nata (PRN)- to a treat-and-extend (T&E)-based therapeutic approach in cases of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD). We therefore wished to compare the effects of instigating 2 different protocols in newly-diagnosed nAMD undergoing treatment with Ranibizumab.
The outcomes of a PRN- and a T&E-based regime were retrospectively compared in treatment-naïve eyes under therapy with Ranibizumab for minimally 12 months in a routine clinical setting. The primary outcome measures included the proportion of the eyes with intraretinal fluid in OCT and visual stability after the initial drug-loading phase.
The comparative case-series included 107 eyes (PRN: 68; T&E: 39). During the 2-year follow-up period, a similar number of clinical examinations were performed in the 2 groups (PRN: 14.0 ± 6.2; T&E 13.4 ± 4.4; P = 0.97), whereas the number of injections that were administered differed for the first (PRN: 5.5 ± 2.0 vs. T&E 6.8 ± 2.4; P = 0.008) and the second year (PRN: 1.9 ± 2.0 vs. T&E 3.8 ± 2.3; P = 0.002). The proportion of eyes with intraretinal fluid after the initial drug-loading phase remained stable (PRN: from 33.8% to 36.4%; T&E: from 25.6% to 29.0%); so, too, did the central retinal thickness and the visual acuity.
Despite a limited sample size, this retrospective analysis revealed the anatomical and the functional improvements during the 2-year follow-up period to be not roughly different for the 2 strategies. However, when the PRN-approach is instigated, the risk of under-treatment due to lapses in visits or to over-extensions in the intervals between treatments may be underestimated.
To evaluate the effect of stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) in conjunction with intravitreal injections (IVI) of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) drugs on peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer (pRNFL) thickness in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
This was a retrospective, observational case series of patients with nAMD, who underwent SRT and subsequently had at least 12 months of complete follow-up. After SRT and one mandatory IVI, patients were examined monthly and received further treatment on a pro re nata basis. Examination included spectral-domain optical coherence tomography of the optic disc to measure pRNFL thickness. Patients' data were retrieved from medical records including demographics, disease duration, best-corrected visual acuity, previous number of intravitreal injections, and the type of drug applied.
A total of 35 eyes of 35 patients (76.23 ± 7.05 years) were included. The mean duration of nAMD at time of irradiation was 34.57 ± 16.96 months. During that time, patients received a mean total number of 15.83 ± 6.29 intravitreal injections, 6.86 ± 1.57 within the last 12 months before SRT. After SRT, on average 3.46 ± 2.09 injections were administered over 12 months, resulting in a mean total number of 19.29 ± 6.92 injections at final follow-up. The mean global pRNFL thickness was 97.23 ± 12.55 µm at time of irradiation, 95.54 ± 11.07 µm at 6 month (P = 0.299), and 95.29 ± 12.07 µm at 12 month (P = 0.373) follow-up.
SRT in conjunction with anti-VEGF injections did not lead to any significant change in pRNFL thickness over 12 months in patients with nAMD. However, long-term results are not yet available. Therefore, prospective studies with longer follow-up are needed to corroborate these findings.
To identify risk factors for the progression of early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in Koreans.
This study was conducted at a health-screening center and followed a prospective cohort study design. Of 10,890 participants older than 50 years, 318 (2.92%) presented with early AMD. Among these 318 participants, we re-examined 172 participants after a mean duration of 4.4 years. Progression was defined by the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) simplified AMD severity scale. Multivariable logistic regression was used to examine associations between AMD progression and baseline physical, demographic, behavioral, and ocular characteristics.
Of the 172 participants with early AMD who were re-examined, 34 (19.8%) had progression. Multivariable analyses revealed that current smoking (odds ratio, OR, 7.0, 95% confidence interval, CI, 1.4-34.4, adjusted for age, alcohol consumption, body mass index, BMI, blood pressure, BP, total cholesterol, and high density lipoprotein, HDL, cholesterol) and hypertension (OR 10.3, 95% CI 1.9-55.7, adjusted for age, smoking status, alcohol consumption, BMI, total cholesterol, and HDL cholesterol) were independently associated with progression of early AMD. Additionally, the presence of a central drusen lesion within one-third disc diameter of the macula (age-adjusted OR 4.8, 95% CI 1.3-17.6) and 20 or more drusen (age adjusted OR 7.8, 95% CI 2.5-24.0) were independently associated with progression of early AMD.
Current smoking, hypertension, central drusen location, and increasing number of drusen were associated with an increased risk of early AMD progression in Koreans.
To present clinical results regarding the treatment of patients with age-related macular degeneration (neovascular form) after the implementation of a 'virtual' type of follow-up in a single retina service centre.
Retrospective study based on the clinical records of the Leicester Royal Infirmary Retina department. Two periods were compared, the 2-year period of 2011-2012 and the following one of 2012-2013 when the 'virtual' clinics model applied in the department. Primary outcomes were as follows: the time between two appointments, follow-up or treatment and the number of patients with significant (>15 letters) improvement of their best corrected distance visual acuity. Secondary parameters of interest were as follows: mean number of injections per patient/year and the average duration of a 'virtual' vs. a regular visit.
The mean time interval between two appointments was 5.3 weeks following the implementation of the 'virtual' clinics compared to 6.9 weeks in the previous period of regular appointments. Mean visual acuity improvement >15 letters was achieved in 6.9% of the patients compared to 23.1% of the 'virtual' appointments period. The results regarding injections/patient/year were as follows: 5.6 before the model of 'virtual' appointments and 5.9 after the implementation. The average time a patient spent for a conventional visit was 71.4 ± 24.1 min, and the respective time needed in the virtual clinic was 47.3 ± 18.6 min.
The model of 'virtual' (without actual consultation) follow-up appointments assisted our service to contend with the increased number of patient. In general, the specific pattern of patients' management could be widely considered obviously after comprehensive and all-embracing assessment of its safety and efficiency.
Biomarkers can help unravel mechanisms of disease and identify new targets for therapy. They can also be useful in clinical practice for monitoring disease progression, evaluation of treatment efficacy, and risk assessment in multifactorial diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD). AMD is a highly prevalent progressive retinal disorder for which multiple genetic and environmental risk factors have been described, but the exact etiology is not yet fully understood. Many compounds have been evaluated for their association with AMD. We performed an extensive literature review of all compounds measured in serum, plasma, vitreous, aqueous humor, and urine of AMD patients. Over 3600 articles were screened, resulting in more than 100 different compounds analyzed in AMD studies, involved in neovascularization, immunity, lipid metabolism, extracellular matrix, oxidative stress, diet, hormones, and comorbidities (such as kidney disease). For each compound, we provide a short description of its function and discuss the results of the studies in relation to its usefulness as AMD biomarker. In addition, biomarkers identified by hypothesis-free techniques, including metabolomics, proteomics, and epigenomics, are covered. In summary, compounds belonging to the oxidative stress pathway, the complement system, and lipid metabolism are the most promising biomarker candidates for AMD. We hope that this comprehensive survey of the literature on systemic and ocular fluid compounds as potential biomarkers in AMD will provide a stepping stone for future research and possible implementation in clinical practice.
Multiple lines of evidence support an immunologic basis and genetic disposition for the development of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Comprehensive human leukocyte antigens (HLA) class II typing at four loci (DRB1, DQA1, DQB1, and DPB1) was assessed using next generation sequencing methods and tested for association with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in a case-control study of 456 AMD cases and 499 controls from the population-based Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) cohort. No statistically significant associations were identified for any of the class II loci and a previously identified association between DRB1*13:01 was not replicated in this dataset. These results reported here suggest that common HLA class II genetic variation does not contribute to AMD disease risk. 
In the non-interventional ophthalmological study 'BRIDGE' the routine care of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) treated with ranibizumab was observed in Germany. A patient regularly sees the general ophthalmologist (GO) for monitoring and, if needed, the injecting ophthalmologist (IO) for intravitreal injections (IVI). Thus, patients are routinely treated by two ophthalmologists in parallel and patient care depends on their collaboration. This cooperation was evaluated based on network questionnaires.
'BRIDGE' was a multicenter, national, open-label, prospective, observational study, conducted between July 2010 and December 2012. The network questionnaire for GOs consisted of 51 questions, while the similar questionnaire for IOs consisted of 43 questions, addressing the type and details of the individual collaboration. The statistical analysis was purely descriptive.
The network questionnaire for GOs was completed by 152 GOs, regularly cooperating with 2.5 ± 1.1 IOs, while the questionnaire for IOs was completed by 43 IOs, regularly cooperating with 23.2 ± 23.6 GOs. Generally, both GOs and IOs stated that they regularly exchange information regarding the patients' situation. Diagnostic standards were only established for 15 % of the GOs' collaborations and for 35 % of the IOs' collaborations. After initial treatment, both GOs and IOs agreed on the medical significance of regular monitoring visits performed by the GOs. Agreements on re-treatment criteria were only established in the case of 16 % of the GOs and 28 % of the IOs. Overall, both GOs and IOs were satisfied with the current situation, with regard to the medical treatment situation for patients and to the cooperation within the networks.
The network questionnaires revealed well-established cooperation between IOs and GOs in Germany with an accepted division of responsibilities for the routine care of patients with nAMD. However, the cooperation between two ophthalmologists treating one patient harbors risks. Agreements on diagnostic and re-treatment criteria would help to improve network performance and outcomes.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and cataract often coexist in patients and concerns that cataract surgery is associated with an increased risk of incidence or progression of existing AMD has been raised. This systematic review and meta-analysis is focused on presenting the evidence concerning progression of AMD in patients undergoing cataract surgery.
We performed a systematic literature search in the PubMed, Medline, Cochrane Library and CINAHL databases. Two randomized trials and two case-control trials were identified. Quality of the studies was assessed using the Cochrane risk of bias tool, data were extracted, and meta-analyses were performed. Quality of the available evidence was evaluated using the GRADE system.
We found that visual acuity at 6-12 months follow-up was significantly better (6.5-7.5 letters) in eyes that had undergone cataract surgery than in unoperated eyes, but the included number of subjects was small, and hence, the quality of evidence was downgraded to moderate. We did not find an increased risk of progression to exudative AMD 6-12 months after cataract surgery [RR 3.21 (0.14-75.68)], but the included number of subjects was small, and thus, the quality of the evidence was moderate.
Cataract surgery increases visual acuity without an increased risk of progression to exudative AMD, but further research with longer follow-up is encouraged.
To evaluate the relationship between morphological changes and functional improvements assessed using focal macular electroretinograms after intravitreal aflibercept (IVA) injections in eyes with wet age-related macular degeneration.
The clinical records of 42 eyes of 42 consecutive patients with naive, wet age-related macular degeneration received 3 monthly IVA were reviewed. The best-corrected visual acuity, central foveal thickness, outer retinal thickness, inner retinal thickness at baseline and 1 month after each IVA, and focal macular electroretinograms at baseline and 1 month after the first and third IVA were compared.
Best-corrected visual acuity was improved after the third IVA (P = 0.0091). Central foveal thickness and outer retinal thickness showed decreases after every IVA (P < 0.001, respectively). Inner retinal thickness showed a decrease after the second IVA (P = 0.002), after and third IVA (P = 0.001). On focal macular electroretinograms, a- and b-wave amplitudes showed increases after the third IVA (P = 0.0028, P = 0.0012, respectively). Significant correlations were observed between best-corrected visual acuity and central foveal thickness, a-wave amplitude and outer retinal thickness, and b-wave amplitude and inner retinal thickness changes after the third IVA.
All parameters significantly recovered after three monthly IVA, with a correlation between functional improvements and morphological changes.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a major cause of blindness in developed countries and is closely related to oxidative stress, which leads to lipid peroxidation. Malondialdehyde (MDA) is a major byproduct of polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) peroxidation. Increased levels of MDA have been reported in eyes of AMD patients. However, little is known about the direct relationship between MDA and AMD. Here we show the biological importance of MDA in AMD pathogenesis. We first confirmed that MDA levels were significantly increased in eyes of AMD patients. In ARPE-19 cells, a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line, MDA treatment induced vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression alternation, cell junction disruption, and autophagy dysfunction that was also observed in eyes of AMD patients. The MDA-induced VEGF increase was inhibited by autophagy-lysosomal inhibitors. Intravitreal MDA injection in mice increased laser-induced choroidal neovascularization (laser-CNV) volumes. In a mouse model fed a high-linoleic acid diet for 3 months, we found a significant increase in MDA levels, autophagic activity, and laser-CNV volumes. Our study revealed an important role of MDA, which acts not only as a marker but also as a causative factor of AMD pathogenesis-related autophagy dysfunction. Furthermore, higher dietary intake of linoleic acid promoted CNV progression in mice with increased MDA levels.
Nanoparticles combined with cells, drugs, and specially designed genes provide improved therapeutic efficacy in studies and clinical setting, demonstrating a new era of treatment strategy, especially in retinal diseases. Nanotechnology-based drugs can provide an essential platform for sustaining, releasing and a specific targeting design to treat retinal diseases. Poly-lactic-co-glycolic acid is the most widely used biocompatible and biodegradable polymer approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Many studies have attempted to develop special devices for delivering small-molecule drugs, proteins, and other macromolecules consistently and slowly. In this article, we first review current progress in the treatment of age-related macular degeneration. Then, we discuss the function of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and the pharmacological effects of anti-VEGF-A antibodies and soluble or modified VEGF receptors. Lastly, we summarize the combination of antiangiogenic therapy and nanomedicines, and review current potential targeting therapy in age-related macular degeneration. 
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the major cause of blindness in developed nations. AMD is characterized by retinal pigmented epithelial (RPE) cell dysfunction and loss of photoreceptor cells. Epidemiologic studies indicate important contributions of dietary patterns to the risk for AMD, but the mechanisms relating diet to disease remain unclear. Here we investigate the effect on AMD of isocaloric diets that differ only in the type of dietary carbohydrate in a wild-type aged-mouse model. The consumption of a high-glycemia (HG) diet resulted in many AMD features (AMDf), including RPE hypopigmentation and atrophy, lipofuscin accumulation, and photoreceptor degeneration, whereas consumption of the lower-glycemia (LG) diet did not. Critically, switching from the HG to the LG diet late in life arrested or reversed AMDf. LG diets limited the accumulation of advanced glycation end products, long-chain polyunsaturated lipids, and their peroxidation end-products and increased C3-carnitine in retina, plasma, or urine. Untargeted metabolomics revealed microbial cometabolites, particularly serotonin, as protective against AMDf. Gut microbiota were responsive to diet, and we identified microbiota in the Clostridiales order as being associated with AMDf and the HG diet, whereas protection from AMDf was associated with the Bacteroidales order and the LG diet. Network analysis revealed a nexus of metabolites and microbiota that appear to act within a gut-retina axis to protect against diet- and age-induced AMDf. The findings indicate a functional interaction between dietary carbohydrates, the metabolome, including microbial cometabolites, and AMDf. Our studies suggest a simple dietary intervention that may be useful in patients to arrest AMD.
Genetic factors are known to influence the response to anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) treatment in exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD). The current study was conducted to investigate the association of Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) polymorphism with the treatment response to ranibizumab for exudative AMD.
One hundred nine eyes (109 patients, 59.6% male, mean age 63.84 ± 7.22 years) treated with intravitreal ranibizumab injections were included in the analysis. Smoking status and lesion type were recorded. Patients were categorized into three groups according to visual acuity (VA) change at 6 months after the first injection: VA loss >5 Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) letters (Group 1); VA change between five ETDRS letters gain and loss (Group 2); VA improvement >5 ETDRS letters (Group 3). The association of ApoE gene polymorphisms with the three groups was evaluated.
Both smoking status and lesion type showed no significant association with VA change (p = 0.12 and p = 0.64, respectively). A lower frequency of ɛ2 and a higher frequency of ɛ4 were observed in Group 3 (2.9 and 25.7%, respectively). VA improvement with more than five ETDRS letters was significantly associated with the presence of the ɛ4 genotype (p = 0.01).
This study demonstrated that carriers of the ApoE ɛ4 polymorphism genotype show demonstrable improvement in VA after treatment with ranibizumab in exudative AMD. ApoE polymorphism identification may be used as a genetic screening to tailor individualized therapeutic approach for optimal treatment in neovascular AMD.
Activity-based treatment regimens with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) are currently the gold standard for treatment of exudative age-related macular degeneration (nAMD). Whereas injection frequencies of approximately seven injections in the first year and six in the second year are expected with a pro re nata (PRN) regimen, retrospective real life observations have recorded significantly reduced numbers of injections. This study was carried out to investigate the reasons for the reduction in follow-up control appointments and to find out whether a telemedicine network could influence the motivation and compliance for regular control examinations and treatment.
The patient collective included 210 eyes from 191 patients with nAMD treated by anti-VEGF therapy in 2010 and 2011. The activity-based anti-VEGF treatment, control examinations and treatment intervals were performed according to the guidelines over a mean follow-up of 2 years. In another collective of 100 eyes from 100 patients with treatment of nAMD 2 groups were observed: 1 group with patients for whom control examinations were carried out close to home including an online transmission of the results to the treating retinal center and another group in which the patients had to be examined in the treatment center.
After 140 weeks 50 % of the patients in the first collective regularly attended control examinations and after 1 year the number was 79 %. After 2 years the probability of continuous supervision is given for only 62 % of the patients, whereas in 38 % the treatment was terminated. Of these patients treatment was terminated in 8 % due to valid criteria, whereas in 30 % of the patients the termination was unintentional. The main reason (38 %) for an unintentional termination of examination and treatment was the frequent and long journey. Patients in the second collective had a significantly higher compliance with respect to the control examinations (p < 0.001) and number of injections (p = 0.02) over the period of nearly 2 years due to the introduction of electronic transmission of images.
A long-term therapy of nAMD in the clinical routine can be achieved by a close relationship with the ophthalmologist, continuous follow-up controls and therapy cycles. A close telemedical networking between the ophthalmologist and the treatment center can lead to better patient compliance. Furthermore, the construction of such platforms represents a challenge not only for the treatment of nAMD but also for other diseases.
To establish fluctuation limits, it was considered that not only overall macular sensitivity but also fluctuations of individual test points in the macula might have clinical value.
Three repeated measurements of microperimetry were performed using the Standard Expert test of Macular Integrity Assessment (MAIA) in healthy subjects (<i>N</i> = 12, age = 23.8 ± 1.5 years old) and in patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) (<i>N</i> = 11, age = 68.5 ± 7.4 years old). A total of 37 macular points arranged in four concentric rings and in four quadrants were analyzed individually and in groups.
The data show low fluctuation of macular sensitivity of individual test points in healthy subjects (average = 1.38 ± 0.28 dB) and AMD patients (average = 2.12 ± 0.60 dB). Lower sensitivity points are more related to higher fluctuation than to the distance from the central point. Fixation stability showed no effect on the sensitivity fluctuation. The 95th percentile of the standard deviations of healthy subjects was, on average, 2.7 dB, ranging from 1.2 to 4 dB, depending on the point tested.
Point analysis and regional analysis might be considered prior to evaluating macular sensitivity fluctuation in order to distinguish between normal variation and a clinical change.
<b>S</b>tatistical methods were used to compare repeated microperimetry measurements and to establish fluctuation limits of the macular sensitivity. This analysis could add information regarding the integrity of different macular areas and provide new insights into fixation points prior to the biofeedback fixation training.
miR-126 has recently been implicated in modulating angiogenic factors in vascular development. Understandings its biological significance might enable development of therapeutic interventions for diseases like age-related macular degeneration (AMD). We aimed to determine the role of miR-126 in AMD using a laser-induced choroidal neovascularization (CNV) mouse model. CNV was induced by laser photocoagulation in C57BL/6 mice. The CNV mice were transfected with scrambled miR or miR-126 mimic. The expression of miR-126, vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A), Kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) and Sprouty-related EVH1 domain-containing protein 1 (SPRED-1) in ocular tissues were analyzed by qPCR and Western blot. The overexpression effects of miR-126 were also proven on human microvascular endothelial cells (HMECs). miR-126 showed a significant decrease in CNV mice (p < 0.05). Both mRNA and protein levels of VEGF-A, KDR and SPRED-1 were upregulated with CNV; these changes were ameliorated by restoration of miR-126 (p < 0.05). CNV was reduced after miR-126 transfection. Transfection of miR-126 reduced the HMECs 2D-capillary-like tube formation (p < 0.01) and migration (p < 0.01). miR-126 has been shown to be a negative modulator of angiogenesis in the eye. All together these results high lights the therapeutic potential of miR-126 suggests that it may contribute as a putative therapeutic target for AMD in humans. 
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is one of the major causes of irreversible blindness. The objective of this study was to determine whether there is any relationship between dietary intake of fruits and vegetables (F&V) and antioxidant nutrients including carotenoids and AMD according to smoking status in elderly men.
We performed a cross-sectional analysis using nationally representative samples of elderly aged ≥ 65 years (n = 1414) from the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (KNHANES, 2010-2012).
The current smokers consumed less food in total, and, in particular, less cereals/potatoes/sugar products, fruits and vegetables than the nonsmokers and former smokers (p < 0.05). Intake of energy, thiamin, vitamin C, vitamin A, and β-carotene were significantly lower in the current smokers than in the nonsmokers and the former smokers. For current smokers, the ORs of the highest tertile compared with the lowest tertile were 0.36 (95% CI: 0.14-0.96, p for trend = 0.0576) for F&V, 0.32 (95% CI: 0.12-0.85, p for trend = 0.0561) for vitamin C, 0.23 (95% CI: 0.08-0.67, p for trend = 0.0038) for α-carotene, 0.13 (95% CI: 0.04-0.46, p for trend = 0.0003) for β-carotene after adjusting for confounding factors. In contrast, there was no association between antioxidant nutrient intake and AMD among the nonsmokers and former smokers.
These results suggest that increased consumption of fruits and vegetables containing antioxidant components such as vitamin C, α-carotene, and β-carotene may have a protective effect on AMD. These effects may be more evident among current smokers.
Various in vitro culture systems have been used to investigate the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). However, many still rely on oversimplified monolayer culture models. AMD is a complex disease, associated with the pathological changes to multiple structural components such as the Bruch's membrane, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), and choroidal endothelial cells. This study aims to construct a novel 3D coculture model using the polycaprolactone (PCL)-gelatin electrospun scaffold, with human RPE cells (hRPE) and primate choroidal cells (RF-6A). Results from this study show that PCL-gelatin scaffolds have a highly porous ultrastructure that supports the attachment, proliferation, differentiation, and migration of the hRPEs and choroidal endothelial cells. It is also demonstrated that the PCL-gelatin 3D coculture model may be useful in exploring the molecular interplay between the hPRE and the choroidal endothelial cells, and their effects on growth factor modulation, which may be important in the pathogenesis of AMD.
To determine the frequency of the genotypes of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene encoding cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) and their associations with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in the Lithuanian population.
A total of 1264 subjects were examined: 251 patients with early AMD, 206 patients with exudative AMD, and 807 healthy controls.
The genotyping of CETP (rs5882, rs708272, rs3764261, rs1800775, rs2303790) was carried out using the RT-PCR.
Binomial logistic regression analysis revealed that each copy of rs5882 allele A was associated with a 1.3-fold increased risk of exudative AMD (p=0.046). The G/A and A/A genotypes of the rs708272 polymorphism were associated with 1.5-fold and 1.7-fold increased risks of exudative AMD (p=0.049 and p=0.021, respectively). Combination of two genotypes (G/A+A/A) under the dominant model were associated with a 1.5-fold increased risk of exudative AMD (p=0.021). Analysis of rs708272 revealed that the G/A and A/A genotypes under the co-dominant model were associated with 1.5-fold and 1.7-fold increased risks of exudative AMD, respectively (OR=1.450, 95% CI=1.002-2.098; p=0.049 and OR=1.710, 95% CI=1.064-2.156; p=0.021, respectively). Both genotypes (G/A+A/A) under the dominant model were associated with the 1.5-fold increased risk of exudative AMD, as well (OR=1.514, 95% CI=1.064-2.156; p=0.021) and each additional copy A allele was associated with a 1.3-fold increased risk of exudative AMD (OR=1.316, 95% CI=1.051-1.646; p=0.016). The rs3764261 polymorphism was identified to be protective: the C/A genotype and the combination of two genotypes (C/A+A/A) were associated with 1.8-fold and 1.5-fold decreased risks of exudative AMD (p=0.001 and p=0.015, respectively).
Our study identified two polymorphisms with a higher risk of AMD development (rs5882 and rs708272) and a protective polymorphism for AMD (rs3764261).
A subset of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nvAMD) subjects appears to be refractory to the effects of anti-VEGF treatment and require frequent intravitreal injections. Prokineticin-2 (Bv8) expression in CD11b(+) cells has been linked to anti-VEGF response. We have developed a reproducible method to quantify gene expression in circulating CD11b + cells. Utilizing this method we tested the hypothesis that high Bv8 expression in circulating CD11b(+) cells is associated with anti-VEGF refractoriness in nvAMD patients. Two groups of nvAMD subjects undergoing treatment with anti-VEGF agents were recruited and classified as refractory or non-refractory to anti-VEGF treatment (n = 33 for each group). Two blood draws were obtained from each subject 1-9 months apart. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated and CD11b(+) cells were purified via magnetic bead separation. RNA was purified, and relative expression of Bv8 among the subjects was compared via quantitative PCR analysis. Utilizing this approach no significant difference was detected in the mean LogRQ values between the first and second blood draws (t-test, p = 0.826) indicating low intra-patient variability and demonstrating good reproducibility of the assay. There was no significant difference in Bv8 expression between nvAMD subjects classified as refractory versus non-refractory. We were unable to find a correlation between Bv8 expression in CD11b + cells and anti-VEGF refractoriness in human nvAMD subjects. Relatively high expression in Bv8 in these subjects did not correlate with clinical treatment history, as measured by the frequency of injections. Utilizing this well characterized technique, studies are underway to examine alternative gene expression profiles in various circulating cell populations that may contribute to anti-VEGF refractoriness.
To evaluate the association between subfoveal choroidal thickness and the visual outcome in eyes with type 1 choroidal neovascularization (CNV) due to neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
This was a retrospective, longitudinal, cross-sectional study including patients diagnosed with nAMD type 1 lesions managed with intravitreal injections of ranibizumab in a PRN strategy during 24 months. Retrospective chart review of patients with type 1 CNV recording the visual acuity, number of intravitreal injections, multimodal imaging data, and follow-up period was performed. Subfoveal choroidal thickness was measured using enhanced depth imaging scans obtained with spectral-domain optical coherence tomography.
Twenty-five eyes of 21 patients were included. The mean baseline logMAR best-corrected visual acuity was 0.52 (+0.35) (median 0.5; range 0.1-1; interquartile range (IQR) 0.3-0.8) and improved to 0.39 (+0.39) (median 0.4; range 0.1-1; IQR 0.2-0.5) by the end of the follow-up (p = 0.038). Subfoveal choroidal thickness was 202.8 (+60.3) μm (median 218; range 81-285; IQR 146-258). Statistical mixed effects model demonstrated an association between rate of improvement of visual acuity with subfoveal choroidal thickness after 24 months (p<0.001) (95% confidence interval 0.0002-0.0001 logMAR month μm); higher thickness values were correlated with better visual acuity.
Thicker subfoveal choroid was associated with better visual outcomes in patients with type 1 CNV due to nAMD following a strict PRN regimen with intravitreal ranibizumab at 24 months of follow-up.
The goal of this study was to evaluate five year functional and anatomical outcomes of wet AMD patients treated with ranibizumab according to a pro re nata (PRN) regimen in real-life practice.
A retrospective, multicentric chart review of 201 eyes of 201 patients who underwent their first ranibizumab intravitreal injection (IVT) between January 1, 2007 and December 31, 2008 was performed. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central macular thickness (CMT) on SD-OCT, number of IVT and follow-up visits were collected at baseline and during the entire follow-up period of 5 years.
Mean BCVA at baseline was 52.3±16.5 letters. Mean BCVA change from baseline was respectively +2.8, +2.5, +1.8, -0.6 at 1, 2, 3, 4 years of follow-up. At year 5, 43% of eyes had a stable or improved letter score (≥0 letter gain), whereas 29% declined by 15 letters or more, with an overall significant mean decline of 2.8 letters (P<0.05). No correlation was observed between final visual outcome and age, baseline BCVA, type of neovascularization, naive status, number of IVT or number of follow-up visits. On SD-OCT, mean CMT was 293±96μm at baseline and was significantly reduced compared to baseline at each year end-point (P<0.005). The mean number of IVT was 15±10.4 at year 5, with 55% of eyes still being under active treatment.
PRN ranibizumab in real-life practice improved or stabilized visual acuity over 4 years. During the 5th year, progressive decline of visual acuity was observed.
Since they were first derived more than three decades ago, embryonic stem cells have been proposed as a source of replacement cells in regenerative medicine, but their plasticity and unlimited capacity for self-renewal raises concerns about their safety, including tumour formation ability, potential immune rejection, and the risk of differentiating into unwanted cell types. We report the medium-term to long-term safety of cells derived from human embryonic stem cells (hESC) transplanted into patients.
In the USA, two prospective phase 1/2 studies were done to assess the primary endpoints safety and tolerability of subretinal transplantation of hESC-derived retinal pigment epithelium in nine patients with Stargardt's macular dystrophy (age >18 years) and nine with atrophic age-related macular degeneration (age >55 years). Three dose cohorts (50,000, 100,000, and 150,000 cells) were treated for each eye disorder. Transplanted patients were followed up for a median of 22 months by use of serial systemic, ophthalmic, and imaging examinations. The studies are registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, numbers NCT01345006 (Stargardt's macular dystrophy) and NCT01344993 (age-related macular degeneration).
There was no evidence of adverse proliferation, rejection, or serious ocular or systemic safety issues related to the transplanted tissue. Adverse events were associated with vitreoretinal surgery and immunosuppression. 13 (72%) of 18 patients had patches of increasing subretinal pigmentation consistent with transplanted retinal pigment epithelium. Best-corrected visual acuity, monitored as part of the safety protocol, improved in ten eyes, improved or remained the same in seven eyes, and decreased by more than ten letters in one eye, whereas the untreated fellow eyes did not show similar improvements in visual acuity. Vision-related quality-of-life measures increased for general and peripheral vision, and near and distance activities, improving by 16-25 points 3-12 months after transplantation in patients with atrophic age-related macular degeneration and 8-20 points in patients with Stargardt's macular dystrophy.
The results of this study provide the first evidence of the medium-term to long-term safety, graft survival, and possible biological activity of pluripotent stem cell progeny in individuals with any disease. Our results suggest that hESC-derived cells could provide a potentially safe new source of cells for the treatment of various unmet medical disorders requiring tissue repair or replacement.
Advanced Cell Technology.
Understanding the range of temporal responses to ranibizumab is critical for the assessment of individualized treatment regimens for neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
To examine patterns of visual and anatomical response to ranibizumab treatment.
This study is a retrospective subanalysis of HARBOR (a phase 3, double-masked, multicenter, randomized, active treatment-controlled study of the efficacy and safety of 0.5 mg and 2.0 mg ranibizumab administered monthly or on an as-needed basis (PRN) in patients with subfoveal neovascular age-related macular degeneration). A total of 1097 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration were randomized to intravitreal ranibizumab, 0.5 or 2.0 mg, administered monthly or as needed (PRN) with monthly monitoring. Of the 1097 patients, 1057 were included in the analysis for early responders (best-corrected visual acuity [BCVA] obtained at baseline and month 3), and 988 patients were included in the analysis for delayed responders (BCVA obtained at baseline, month 3, and month 12). The HARBOR study began July 7, 2009, with the primary 12-month end point completed on August 5, 2011, ongoing to 24 months. Data analysis for the subgroup was performed from January 4, 2013, through December 17, 2015.
Patients were categorized based on BCVA outcomes as early 15-letter responders (gained ≥15 letters from baseline at month 3) or delayed 15-letter responders (did not gain ≥15 letters from baseline at month 3 but did so at month 12).
Changes from baseline in BCVA and central foveal thickness (CFT).
In total, 266 early and 135 delayed 15-letter responders were identified. In the 0.5-mg monthly, 0.5-mg PRN, 2.0-mg monthly, and 2.0-mg PRN treatment groups, 63 (24.0%) of 263, 65 (24.6%) of 264, 68 (25.7%) of 265, and 70 (26.4%) of 265 patients were early responders, respectively, and 40 (16.3%) of 246, 31 (12.6%) of 247, 35 (14.1%) of 248, and 29 (11.7%) of 247 patients were delayed responders, respectively. By month 12, early vs delayed responders in the PRN treatment groups received 7.5 vs 7.4 ranibizumab injections, respectively (P = .84). More than 80% of early responders receiving PRN treatment maintained 15-letter or greater gains at month 24. At baseline, early vs delayed responders had worse BCVA (49.8 vs 55.4 letters; P < .001) and greater CFT (374.9 vs 339.0 µm; P = .02), although anatomical results were comparable by month 3 (CFT, 187.7 vs 188.9 µm).
Improvement of 15 letters or more from baseline occurred in 266 (25.2%) of 1057 patients within 3 months of beginning ranibizumab treatment, whereas an additional 135 (13.7%) of 988 patients achieved this gain by 12 months. The 2 cohorts had similar anatomical temporal response patterns. PRN treatment with monthly monitoring was effective in maintaining early vision gains and allowing delayed vision gains. These results suggest that vision improvement can continue in some patients after macular edema resolves and CFT decreases stabilize.
The actions of nutrients and related compounds on age-related macular degeneration (AMD) are explained in this review. The findings from 80 studies published since 2003 on the association between diet and supplements in AMD were reviewed. Antioxidants and other nutrients with an effect on AMD susceptibility include carotenoids (lutein and zeaxanthin, β-carotene), vitamins (vitamin A, E, C, D, B), mineral supplements (zinc, copper, selenium), dietary fatty acids [monounsaturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA both omega-3 PUFA and omega-6 PUFA), saturated fatty acids and cholesterol], and dietary carbohydrates. The literature revealed that many of these antioxidants and nutrients exert a protective role by functioning synergistically. Specifically, the use of dietary supplements with targeted actions can provide minimal benefits on the onset or progression of AMD; however, this does not appear to be particularly beneficial in healthy people. Furthermore, some supplements or nutrients have demonstrated discordant effects on AMD in some studies. Since intake of dietary supplements, as well as exposure to damaging environmental factors, is largely dependent on population habits (including dietary practices) and geographical localization, an overall healthy diet appears to be the best strategy in reducing the risk of developing AMD. As of now, the precise mechanism of action of certain nutrients in AMD prevention remains unclear. Thus, future studies are required to examine the effects that nutrients have on AMD and to determine which factors are most strongly correlated with reducing the risk of AMD or preventing its progression. 
Undertake a systematic investigation into associations between genetic predictors of lipid fractions and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) risk.
Two-sample Mendelian randomization investigation using published data.
A total of 33 526 individuals (16 144 cases, 17 832 controls) predominantly of European ancestry from the International Age-related Macular Degeneration Genomics Consortium.
We consider 185 variants previously demonstrated to be associated with at least 1 of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, or triglycerides at a genome-wide level of significance, and test their associations with AMD. We particularly focus on variants in gene regions that are proxies for specific pharmacologic agents for lipid therapy. We then conduct a 2-sample Mendelian randomization investigation to assess the causal roles of LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, and triglycerides on AMD risk. We also conduct parallel investigations for coronary artery disease (CAD) (viewed as a positive control) and Alzheimer's disease (a negative control) for comparison.
Diagnosis of AMD.
We find evidence that HDL-cholesterol is a causal risk factor for AMD, with an odds ratio (OR) estimate of 1.22 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.03-1.44) per 1 standard deviation increase in HDL-cholesterol. No causal effect of LDL-cholesterol or triglycerides was found. Variants in the CETP gene region associated with increased circulating HDL-cholesterol also associate with increased AMD risk, although variants in the LIPC gene region that increase circulating HDL-cholesterol have the opposite direction of association with AMD risk. Parallel analyses suggest that lipids have a greater role for AMD compared with Alzheimer's disease, but a lesser role than for CAD.
Some genetic evidence suggests that HDL-cholesterol is a causal risk factor for AMD risk and that increasing HDL-cholesterol (particularly via CETP inhibition) will increase AMD risk.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is an eye disease causing blindness in the elderly. It shares many common possible pathogenic mechanisms with cardiovascular diseases. Many studies have discussed the association between AMD and stroke, but the results were inconsistent. Our aim was to determine the associations between neovascular AMD and the risk of stroke in the Taiwanese population.
This is a retrospective cohort study. We used claims data from National Health Insurance Research Database. Patients aged more than 45 years without stroke, myocardial infarction, or any AMD were selected from 2001 to 2008 and followed until 2010. The index date was defined as the date of nAMD diagnosis (ICD-9 code, 362.52). The comparison group was patients without an nAMD diagnosis with age- and sex-matched to nAMD subjects at a ratio of up to 10 to 1. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox regression analysis were used. The incidence of stroke events (ICD-9 codes, 430-434) and their subtypes (hemorrhagic and ischemic) were primary outcomes. Secondary outcomes included acute myocardial infarction (AMI), composite AMI/stroke, and all-cause mortality.
Patients with nAMD had a higher risk of developing stroke, with an adjusted HR of 1.30 (95% CI, 1.01-1.68). A higher risk for hemorrhagic stroke (HR, 1.70, 95% CI, 1.03-2.83) was also found. No significant differences were observed in ischemic stroke, the composite of AMI/stroke, and all-cause mortality.
Patients with nAMD had a significantly higher risk of developing stroke, which was driven mainly by the increased risk of developing the hemorrhagic subtype.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a progressive eye disease that impairs central vision among elderly populations in Western, industrialized countries. In this review we will focus on the role of factor D (FD) and lutein in AMD. FD is a rate-limiting enzyme of the alternative complement activation pathway that may play an important role in the development of AMD. Several independent studies have shown a significant increase in the level of a number of complement factors of the alternative pathway, including factor D in the blood of AMD patients as compared to healthy individuals, which suggests a systemic involvement in the pathogenesis of AMD. FD, also called adipsin, is mainly produced by adipose tissue. Besides playing a role in the activation of the alternative pathway, FD is also known to regulate the immune system. Of interest is our preliminary finding that lutein supplementation of early AMD cases was shown to lower the level of systemic FD. If confirmed, these findings provide further support for the application of anti-factor D intervention as a new approach to control the development of this disease.
The estimation of utility values for the economic evaluation of therapies for wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a particular challenge. Previous economic models in wet AMD have been criticized for failing to capture the bilateral nature of wet AMD by modelling visual acuity (VA) and utility values associated with the better-seeing eye only.
Here we present a de novo regression analysis using generalized estimating equations (GEE) applied to a previous dataset of time trade-off (TTO)-derived utility values from a sample of the UK population that wore contact lenses to simulate visual deterioration in wet AMD. This analysis allows utility values to be estimated as a function of VA in both the better-seeing eye (BSE) and worse-seeing eye (WSE).
VAs in both the BSE and WSE were found to be statistically significant (p < 0.05) when regressed separately. When included without an interaction term, only the coefficient for VA in the BSE was significant (p = 0.04), but when an interaction term between VA in the BSE and WSE was included, only the constant term (mean TTO utility value) was significant, potentially a result of the collinearity between the VA of the two eyes. The lack of both formal model fit statistics from the GEE approach and theoretical knowledge to support the superiority of one model over another make it difficult to select the best model.
Limitations of this analysis arise from the potential influence of collinearity between the VA of both eyes, and the use of contact lenses to reflect VA states to obtain the original dataset. Whilst further research is required to elicit more accurate utility values for wet AMD, this novel regression analysis provides a possible source of utility values to allow future economic models to capture the quality of life impact of changes in VA in both eyes.
Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Limited.
To evaluate the outcomes of 5-year ranibizumab treatment in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) in a single center and real life clinical setting.
The records of nAMD patients who were treated with ranibizumab between January 2010 and June 2011 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients who completed 5 years of follow-up were included. Main outcome measures were change in best-corrected visual acuity, central retinal thickness, and visit and injection numbers.
Forty-four eyes of 37 patients were included. Mean best-corrected visual acuity decreased from 0.82 ± 0.69 to 1.11 ± 0.65 logarithm of minimal angle of resolution after 5 years. Twenty-four eyes (54.5%) had visual acuity loss ≥3 lines, and 20 eyes (45.5%) had stable or improved vision (loss <3 lines, remained stable, or gained ≥1 line) at month 60. The mean total number of visits was 25.3 ± 5.8 (range, 14 to 42), and the mean total number of injections was 12.6 ± 6.4 (range, 3 to 26) at month 60.
Half of the ranibizumab-treated nAMD patients maintained their vision during the 5 years of follow-up. Visit and injection numbers were found to be lower than in prospective studies, reflecting a real world clinical practice.
To study the associations of subfoveal choroidal thickness with vascular risk factors and age-related macular degeneration.
Two hundred sixty-one participants of the Alienor study had gradable enhanced-depth imaging optical coherence tomography scans of the macula and available data on vascular and genetic risk factors (assessed through face-to-face interview and fasting blood samples) and age-related macular degeneration status (assessed from retinal photographs and optical coherence tomography). Subfoveal choroidal thickness was measured manually on one horizontal scan passing through the fovea.
In a multivariate mixed linear model, subfoveal choroidal thickness was independently associated with age greater than 80 years (-21.77 μm, P = 0.02), axial length (-21.77 μm, P < 0.0001), heavy smoking (≥20 pack-years: -24.89 μm, P = 0.05), fasting blood glucose higher than 7 mmol/L (-53.17 μm, P = 0.02), and lipid-lowering treatment (+18.23, P = 0.047). After multivariate adjustment for age, sex, axial length, and vascular and genetic risk factors, subfoveal choroidal thickness was thinner in eyes with central hyperpigmentation (-45.39 μm, P = 0.006), central hypopigmentation (-44.99 μm, P = 0.001), and central pigmentary abnormalities (-44.50 μm, P = 0.001), but not in eyes with late age-related macular degeneration (-18.05 μm, P = 0.33) or soft drusen.
These findings indicate a relationship between vascular risk factors and choroidal thinning and suggest an early involvement of the choroid in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of acquired and irreversible blindness among elderly Americans. Most AMD patients have the dry form of the disease (dAMD) for which reliable therapies are lacking. A major obstacle to the development of effective treatments is a deficit in our understanding of what triggers dAMD onset. This is particularly the case with respect to the events that cause retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells to transition from a state of health and homeostasis to one of dysfunction and atrophy. These cells provide critical support to the photoreceptors and their atrophy often precipitates photoreceptor death in dAMD. Chronic oxidative stress is a primary driver of age-dependent, RPE atrophy. Sources of this stress have been identified (e.g., cigarette smoke, photooxidized bisretinoids), but we still do not understand how these stressors damage RPE constituents or what age-dependent changes undermine the cytoprotective systems in the RPE. This review focuses on Nrf2, the master antioxidant transcription factor, and its role in the RPE during aging and dAMD onset. 
The complement system plays a key role in host-defense against common pathogens but must be tightly controlled to avoid inflammation and tissue damage. Polymorphisms in genes encoding two important negative regulators of the alternative complement pathway, complement factor H (CFH) and complement factor I (CFI), are associated with the risk for Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD), a leading cause of vision impairment in the ageing population. In this review, we will discuss the genetic basis of AMD and the potential impact of complement de-regulation on disease pathogenesis. Finally, we will highlight recent therapeutic approaches aimed at controlling complement activation in patients with AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible vision loss among the older population. In China, treatment of age-related ocular diseases is becoming a priority in eye care services. This study was to investigate the clinical characteristics and quality of life of Chinese patients with wet AMD and current treatment types, to evaluate short-term gains in different treatments, and to investigate associations between visual function and vision-related quality of life (VRQoL).
A prospective, observational, noninterventional study was conducted. Basic data were collected from patients with clinical diagnoses of wet AMD before clinical assessments at baseline. VRQoL was measured with the Chinese version of the National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire-25 (NEI VFQ-25). Correlations of the NEI VFQ-25 subscale scores with best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and between-group differences were analyzed.
A total of 80 wet AMD patients were enrolled, with the mean age of 68.40 years. About one-quarter of wet AMD patients received intravitreal (IVT) ranibizumab treatment, and 67% of them were treated on a pro re nata basis. The visual acuity of patients treated with IVT ranibizumab at month 3 after treatment was significantly increased, whereas patients treated with traditional Chinese medicine achieved no significant improvement. Cronbach's α for the NEI VFQ-25 subscales ranged from 0.697 to 0.843. Eight subscale and overall composite scores were moderately correlated with the BCVA of the better-seeing eye. Significant differences in the overall NEI VFQ-25 scores and other subscales were observed between patients with BCVA in the better-seeing eye of less than 50 letters and the others.
Patients treated with IVT ranibizumab experienced better vision improvement at short-term follow-up. The Chinese version of the NEI VFQ-25 is a valid and reliable tool for assessing the VRQoL of Chinese wet AMD patients.
To explore whether the complement factor H (CFH) polymorphism rs1061170/Y402H is associated with responsiveness to antivascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents in age-related macular degeneration (AMD). We reviewed the English literature to examine the association between the polymorphism rs1061170/Y402H of the CFH gene and responsiveness to treatment with anti-VEGF drugs in AMD patients. A meta-analysis of eligible studies was also performed. Pooled odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs were estimated using Stata V.12.0. Statistical heterogeneity was measured using Q-statistic testing. Fourteen relevant studies including a total of 2963 AMD patients were eligible. In AMD patients without a treatment history, individuals carrying the rs1061170/Y402H TT genotype were more likely to achieve a better outcome (OR = 1.932, 95% CI = 1.125-3.317, p = 0.017) than those carrying the CC genotype. The polymorphism rs1061170/Y402H might be a genetic predictor of treatment response to anti-VEGF therapy in AMD patients. Further prospective research including a larger number of patients is needed to validate this finding. 
<b>Background:</b> To assess functional and morphological outcomes in patients with chronic recurrent neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) previously treated with ranibizumab, who were either switched from ranibizumab to aflibercept or received further ranibizumab injections. <b>Methods:</b> Retrospective analysis of eyes with recurrent nAMD previously treated with ranibizumab. On recurrence of the macular oedema, patients had received either 3 injections of aflibercept (2.0 mg) or ranibizumab (0.5 mg) at 4 week intervals. Patients were examined before the first injection and four weeks after the last injection. The main outcome measures included change in visual acuity (VA) in logMAR, subfoveal central retinal thickness (CRT), subretinal fluid (SRF) and height of pigment epithelial detachment (PED height), as well as the maximum height of macular subretinal fluid (SRF max) and of macular pigment epithelial detachment (PED height max) in spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT). Changes in VA and OCT were compared between the two groups to investigate differences in the therapeutic effects of aflibercept and ranibizumab. <b>Results:</b> 60 eyes of 55 patients were included. The aflibercept group (n = 30) and the ranibizumab group (n = 30) showed no statistically significant differences in mean age (p = 0.813), number of prior injections of ranibizumab (p = 0.127) or time since last injection (p = 0.523). Mean VA logMAR improved in both groups, though only in the ranibizumab group was the difference significant (0.50 ± 0.33 to 0.44 ± 0.29 logMAR; p = 0.013; Table 1). CRT decreased in the aflibercept (p = 0.133) and ranibizumab groups (p = 0.043). PED height was reduced in both groups (aflibercept p = 0.068; ranibizumab p = 0.241). SRF, SRF max and PED height max showed statistically significant decreases in both groups. Comparison of the aflibercept and the ranibizumab groups showed no statistically significant differences between the two groups in change in VA logMAR (p = 0.680), CRT (p = 0.882), SRF (p = 0.871), PED height (p = 0.524), SRF max (p = 0.940) or PED height max (p = 0.762). <b>Conclusions:</b> Aflibercept and ranibizumab were similarly effective in improving visual acuity and morphological parameters of patients with recurrent nAMD after four months. There were no statistically significant differences in the therapeutic effects of the two drugs.
To investigate 12-month treatment outcomes of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy in eyes with typical exudative age-related macular degeneration with good baseline visual acuity.
This retrospective observational case series included 18 eyes (18 patients) with typical exudative age-related macular degeneration with a baseline best-corrected visual acuity of 20 / 25 or better. Patients were treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor monotherapy during the 12-month follow-up period. Baseline visual acuity and central foveal thickness were compared to the values at 12 months.
Patients received an average of 4.4 ± 1.3 intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections. The mean logarithm of minimum angle of resolution visual acuity was 0.08 ± 0.04, 0.08 ± 0.07, 0.12 ± 0.09, and 0.16 ± 0.11 at baseline, three months, six months, and 12 months, respectively. Visual acuity at 12 months was significantly worse than the baseline value at diagnosis (p = 0.017), and the mean central foveal thickness at the defined time points was 270.2 ± 55.6, 204.4 ± 25.4, 230.1 ± 56.3, and 216.8 ± 48.7 µm, respectively. The central foveal thickness at 12 months was significantly less than the baseline value at diagnosis (p = 0.042).
Deterioration in visual acuity was noted in eyes with typical exudative age-related macular degeneration with good baseline visual acuity, suggesting the need for close patient monitoring and prompt treatment even in patients with good baseline visual acuity.
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with the CFH, ARMS2, C3, LIPC, CFB, and C2 genes are associated with age-related macular degeneration (AMD); however, the association of these SNPs with angiographic features of neovascular AMD has been inconsistent in previous studies, and to date, no studies have addressed their association with features on optical coherence tomography.
To evaluate the influence of genotype of SNPs previously associated with AMD on the phenotype of neovascular lesions.
Participants for this cross-sectional study were recruited from the 1185 patients enrolled in the Comparison of Age-Related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials (CATT), a randomized clinical trial. Eligibility criteria for CATT specified that eyes have choroidal neovascularization and visual acuity between 20/25 and 20/320. A subgroup of 835 patients provided blood samples from July 2010 through September 2011 and were genotyped for the SNPs rs1061170 (CFH), rs10490924 (ARMS2),rs2230199 (C3), rs10468017 (LIPC), rs4151667 (CFB), rs547154 (C2) using TaqMan SNP genotyping assays. Data analysis was initiated in November 2013 and completed in January 2016.
Pretreatment ocular characteristics on fluorescein angiography (lesion type, area of neovascularization and total lesion, retinal angiomatous proliferation) and on time-domain optical coherence tomography (presence of intraretinal, subretinal, and subretinal pigment epithelium fluid; thickness at the foveal center of the retina, subretinal fluid, and subretinal tissue complex), visual acuity, and age.
A total of 835 (73%) of 1150 CATT patients were genotyped. Mean age decreased with the number of risk alleles for CFH (P < .001), ARMS2 (P < .001), and C3 (P = .005). The following results were found as the number of risk alleles increased from 0 to 1 to 2. For CFH, mean total thickness decreased from 476 to 476 to 434 µm (P = .01; adjusted for age, sex, and smoking status). For ARMS2, the mean area of the total lesion increased from 2.0 to 2.8 to 2.4 mm2 (P = .03), the proportion with retinal angiomatous proliferation lesions increased from 8% to 10% to 12% (P = .05), and the proportion with intraretinal fluid increased from 72% to 71% to 82% (P = .008). For C3, the proportion with intraretinal fluid decreased from 78% to 69% to 64% (P = .001), and the mean retinal thickness decreased from 225 to 207 to 197 µm (P = .02).
CFH, ARMS2, and C3 were associated with specific features of neovascularization at the time patients were enrolled in CATT. Previously identified associations of ARMS2 and CFH with type of choroidal neovascularization on fluorescein angiography were not confirmed. New associations with OCT features identified in CATT need confirmation to establish whether a true association exists.
clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00593450.
Ocular circulation disorders are an important factor in the development of primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). To date, however, there have been no studies on choroidal blood flow peculiarities in case of concurrent AMD and POAG.
to determine distinctive features of choroidal blood flow characteristic of concurrent AMD and POAG and to assess their role in disease pathogenesis.
Macular choroidal blood flow, including blood supply, was assessed in 54 patients (102 eyes) by means of Doppler ultrasound. Three groups were formed: group 1 - 38 eyes with both AMD and POAG; group 2 - 41 eyes with AMD and no signs of optic nerve pathology; and group 3 - 23 eyes with POAG and no signs of AMD. Groups 1 and 2 were subdivided into two subgroups each: А - atrophic AMD and B - macular drusen. The mean patient age was 78.7±8.4 years. The following parameters of choroidal blood flow were of interest: peak systolic velocity (Vps), end diastolic velocity (Ved), time-averaged maximum velocity (Vtamax), and resistance index (RI).
Groups 1, 3, and 2A had an evident choroidal hypoperfusion in the macular area (decreased Vtamax) with uncompensated perfusion deficit, despite autoregulation efforts (decreased Vps, Ved, decreased or normal RI). Group 2B demonstrated a significantly higher rate of choroidal hyperperfusion (increased Vps, Ved, Vtamax, and RI).
Concurrent AMD and POAG are notable for choroidal hypoperfusion in the macular area that leads to inadequate trophism of the neurosensory retina and can aggravate the course of AMD contributing to progression of its atrophic form.
To identify the prevalence and progression of macular atrophy (MA) in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) patients under long-term anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy and to determine risk factors.
This retrospective study included patients with neovascular AMD and ≥30 anti-VEGF injections. Macular atrophy (MA) was measured using near infrared and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). Yearly growth rate was estimated using square-root transformation to adjust for baseline area and allow for linearization of growth rate. Multiple regression with Akaike information criterion (AIC) as model selection criterion was used to estimate the influence of various parameters on MA area.
Forty-nine eyes (47 patients, mean age 77 ± 14) were included with a mean of 48 ± 13 intravitreal anti-VEGF injections (ranibizumab:37 ± 11, aflibercept:11 ± 6, mean number of injections/year 8 ± 2.1) over a mean treatment period of 6.2 ± 1.3 years (range 4-8.5). Mean best-corrected visual acuity improved from 57 ± 17 letters at baseline (= treatment start) to 60 ± 16 letters at last follow-up. The MA prevalence within and outside the choroidal neovascularization (CNV) border at initial measurement was 45% and increased to 74%. Mean MA area increased from 1.8 ± 2.7 mm<sup>2</sup> within and 0.5 ± 0.98 mm<sup>2</sup> outside the CNV boundary to 2.7 ± 3.4 mm<sup>2</sup> and 1.7 ± 1.8 mm<sup>2</sup> , respectively. Multivariate regression determined posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) and presence/development of intraretinal cysts (IRCs) as significant factors for total MA size (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.16, p = 0.02). Macular atrophy (MA) area outside the CNV border was best explained by the presence of reticular pseudodrusen (RPD) and IRC (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.24, p = 0.02).
A majority of patients show MA after long-term anti-VEGF treatment. Reticular pseudodrusen (RPD), IRC and PVD but not number of injections or treatment duration seem to be associated with the MA size.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of vision loss and blindness in people over 65 years old in the United States and has been associated with cardiovascular risk and decreased survival. There is conflicting data, however, regarding the contribution of AMD to the prediction of stroke.
To determine whether AMD is a risk indicator for incident stroke in a meta-analysis of available prospective and retrospective cohort studies published in the English literature.
We performed a systematic literature search of all studies published in English with Pub Med and other databases from 1966 to August 2014, reporting stroke incidence in patients with macular degeneration. Two investigators independently extracted the data. A random effects model was used to report Odds ratios (OR), with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI). Meta-regression using a mixed linear model was used to understand potential heterogeneity amongst studies.
We identified 9 studies that reported stroke incidence in patients with and without early AMD (N = 1,420,978). No significant association was found between early AMD with incident stroke. Combined, these 9 studies demonstrated random effects (OR, 1.12; CI, 0.86-1.47; I2 = 96%). Meta-regression on baseline covariates of age, sex, and year of publication did not significantly relate to heterogeneity.
We found no significant relationship between AMD and incident stroke. Further studies are needed to clarify other causes of decreased survival in patients with AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible vision impairment in older adults in the United States, yet little is known about whether AMD is appropriately diagnosed in primary eye care.
To examine the prevalence of eyes with AMD in patients seen in primary eye care clinics who purportedly have normal macular health per their medical record and the association of AMD with patient and physician characteristics.
In this cross-sectional study of primary eye care practices in Birmingham, Alabama, 644 persons 60 years or older with normal macular health per medical record based on their most recent dilated comprehensive eye examination by a primary eye care ophthalmologist or optometrist were enrolled from May 1, 2009, through December 31, 2011. Data analysis was performed from May 1, 2016, through December 20, 2016.
Presence of AMD as defined by the Clinical Age-Related Maculopathy Staging system based on color fundus photography and a masked grader. Types of AMD-associated lesions were noted. Patient health and physician characteristics were collected.
The sample consisted of 1288 eyes from 644 participants (231 [35.9%] male and 413 [64.1%] female; mean [SD] age, 69.4 [6.1] years; 611 white [94.9%]) seen by 31 primary eye care ophthalmologists or optometrists. A total of 968 eyes (75.2%) had no AMD, in agreement with their medical record; 320 (24.8%) had AMD despite no diagnosis of AMD in the medical record. Among eyes with undiagnosed AMD, 32 (10.0%) had hyperpigmentation, 43 (13.4%) had hypopigmentation, 249 (77.8%) had small drusen, 250 (78.1%) had intermediate drusen, and 96 (30.0%) had large drusen. Undiagnosed AMD was associated with older patient age (odds ratio [OR], 1.06; 95% CI, 1.04-1.09; P < .001), male sex (age-adjusted OR, 1.39; 95% CI, 1.02-1.91; P = .04), and less than a high school education (age-adjusted OR, 2.40; 95% CI, 1.03-5.62; P = .04). Prevalence of undiagnosed AMD was not different for ophthalmologists and optometrists (age adjusted OR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.71-1.36; P = .94).
Approximately 25.0% of eyes deemed to be normal based on dilated eye examination by primary eye care physicians had macular characteristics that indicated AMD revealed by fundus photography and trained raters. A total of 30.0% of eyes with undiagnosed AMD had AMD with large drusen that would have been treatable with nutritional supplements had it been diagnosed. Improved AMD detection strategies may be needed in primary eye care as more effective treatment strategies for early AMD become available in the coming years.
To compare the outcome after choroidal neovascular (CNV) membrane excision and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) transplantation and make further evaluation of two types of RPE grafts on the visual function in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD), complicated by massive subretinal haemorrhage.
We retrospectively reviewed 80 patients who underwent CNV membrane excision with or without RPE transplantation. Two types of RPE grafts were adopted, RPE-Bruch's membrane complex graft (subgroup 1) and RPE monolayer sheet graft (subgroup 2). Outcome measures included pre- and postoperative visual acuity score (VAS), clinical findings, complications and recurrence rates.
The mean VAS [Early Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS)] in the CNV membrane excision group was 11.06 ± 18.28 at baseline and 14.41 ± 16.86 at follow-up (p = 0.12) in a mean follow-up period of 24.35 ± 9.31 months. While in subgroup 1, VAS increased from 22.62 ± 23.72 to 35.50 ± 24.46 (p = 0.02) in a mean period of 20.63 ± 6.25 months. The percentage of visual acuity (VA) improvement (at least two or more lines changed) in subgroup 1 is 62.5%, which is significantly higher than that in CNV excision group (23.5%), p = 0.02. In subgroup 2, VAS increased from 16.61 ± 27.98 to 29.16 ± 23.80 (p = 0.02) in a mean period of 21.72 ± 11.09 months. The percentage of VA improvement in subgroup 2 is 58.0%, which is also significantly higher than that in CNV excision group (23.5%), p = 0.02. Postoperative VA elevation was comparable between the two subgroups (p = 0.05). Complications including retinal detachment, proliferative vitreal retinopathy and CNV recurrence occurred in both techniques. Central fixation stability was observed in eight eyes in subgroup 1 and five eyes in subgroup 2.
The autologous RPE transplantation can increase the vision of patients with haemorrhagic AMD. Two types of autologous RPE grafts were both effective and comparable in restoring visual function and central fixation stability.
Vitamin D status has been hypothesized to protect against development of early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) via its anti-inflammatory properties and its possible beneficial influence on blood pressure control. We investigated the association between vitamin D status and prevalent early AMD in a community-based cohort.
This was a cross-sectional study.
This was a secondary data analysis of already existing data from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study (ARIC) cohort collected from 1990 to 1995.
There were 9,734 (7,779 Caucasians, 1,955 African American) ARIC participants (aged 46 to 70 at visit 2 [1990-1992]) with 25(OH)D data available at visit 2, AMD assessment at visit 3 (1993-1995), and complete covariate data.
Vitamin D status was assessed with serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) concentrations from bloods drawn at visit 2. Prevalent, early AMD (n=511) was assessed at visit 3 (1993-95) with nonmydriatic retinal photographs of one randomly chosen eye. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for early AMD by categories of 25(OH)D in nmol/L (deficient <30, inadequate 30-<50, and two categories of adequate status: 50-<75 and ≥75). Linear trend was estimated using continuous 25(OH)D concentrations. ORs were adjusted for age, race, and smoking status. We further adjusted for hypertension status to examine if vitamin D status influenced early AMD via its effects on blood pressure. Exploratory analyses of effect modification by age, sex, race and high risk genotypes [Y402H complement factor H (CFH) rs1061170 and the A69S age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 (ARMS2) rs10490924 polymorphisms] were conducted.
The prevalence of early AMD was 5%, and 5% of participants were vitamin D deficient. The adjusted OR (95% CIs) for early AMD among those with adequate (≥75 nmol/L) compared to deficient (<30 nmol/L) vitamin D status was 0.94 (0.59-1.50), p-trend=0.86. Further adjustment for hypertension status did not influence results (OR [95% CI]=0.95 [0.59-1.52], p-trend=0.84). Results did not vary significantly by age, race, sex, early AMD subtype (soft drusen or retinal pigment epithelium depigmentation), or ARMS2 genotype. Results did not vary significantly by CFH genotype in African Americans. The p for multiplicative interaction between 25(OH)D and CFH genotype was 0.06 in Caucasians, but OR [95% CIs] for AMD by vitamin D status were similar in each CFH genotype and not statistically significant.
Vitamin D status was not associated with early AMD in this cohort sample.
The aim of this study was to investigate the outcome in near vision and the best-corrected visual acuity in patients with wet, age-related macular degeneration treated with aflibercept in a fixed bimonthly regimen in an ordinary clinical setting.
The study was a retrospective, nonrandomized consecutive case series including 85 patients with wet, age-related macular degeneration followed for 18 months. During the first year all the patients received aflibercept injections in a fixed regimen at the following time points: Month 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12. From Month 12 to Month 18, patients were treated with a treat and extend algorithm.
The median near visual acuity improved from 12 points (95% confidence interval [CI] 10.5-13.4) at baseline to 5 points both at Month 12 (95% CI 3.8-6.2) and at Month 18 (95% CI 3.6-6.4) (P < 0.0001). At the 18-month visit, 58% (42/73) of the patients had a near visual acuity of at least 5 points compared with 7% (6/85) (P < 0.0001) at baseline. Best-corrected visual acuity improved from 60.9 letters (Snellen 20/63) (95% CI 58.4-63.4) at baseline to 68.1 letters (20/40) (95% CI 65.3-70.9) (P < 0.001) at Month 12 and 69.6 letters (20/40) (95% CI 66.7-72.5) (P < 0.001) at Month 18.
Significant improvements were found in near vision and best-corrected visual acuity. The improvement in near vision was comparably greater than the change in best-corrected visual acuity. Monitoring near vision can contribute additional information when managing the patient with wet, age-related macular degeneration.
The aim of this study was to find predictive factors of 1-year visual outcome, analyzing novel optical coherence tomography (OCT) biomarkers in exsudative age-related macular degeneration (choroidal neovascularization (CNV)) in two groups of different treatment modalities.
In all, 34 consecutive patients with new-onset CNV were randomized 1:1 to receive either ranibizumab monotherapy or ranibizumab combined with photodynamic therapy (PDT) with verteporfin. After three initial injections with ranibizumab, re-treatment was performed according to an as-needed scheme; PDT was performed once at baseline. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and OCT parameters like central macular volume (CMV), central macular thickness (or central retinal thickness (CRT)), subretinal and intraretinal fluid, fibrovascular lesion thickness, or inner segment/outer segment (IS/OS) junction were analyzed.
After 12 months, a visual gain of 6.1 letters was found in the monotherapy group, whereas patients in the combination therapy group lost - 4.8 letters from baseline to the 12-month visit. CMV and CRT decreased considerably between baseline and month 2-3 in both groups, with a following slight increase until month 12. Additional application of PDT had negative effect to 12-month BCVA, whereas higher baseline BCVA and integrity of the IS/OS junction at month 12 had positive effect to 12-month BCVA.
Better baseline BCVA and the integrity of IS/OS junction at 12-month visit were the most important predictive factors for final BCVA. Combination therapy caused worse final BCVA and a higher degree of IS/OS disruption.
To examine associations between newly diagnosed neovascular age-related macular degeneration and direct medical costs.
This retrospective observational study matched 23,133 Medicare beneficiaries diagnosed with neovascular age-related macular degeneration between 2004 and 2008 with a control group of 92,532 beneficiaries on the basis of age, sex, and race. The index date for each case-control set corresponded to the first diagnosis for the case. Main outcome measures were total costs per patient and age-related macular degeneration-related costs per case 1 year before and after the index date.
Mean cost per case in the year after diagnosis was $12,422, $4,884 higher than the year before diagnosis. Postindex costs were 41% higher for cases than controls after adjustment for preindex costs and comorbid conditions. Age-related macular degeneration-related costs represented 27% of total costs among cases in the postindex period and were 50% higher for patients diagnosed in 2008 than in 2004. This increase was attributable primarily to the introduction of intravitreous injections of vascular endothelial growth factor antagonists. Intravitreous injections averaged $203 for patients diagnosed in 2004 and $2,749 for patients diagnosed in 2008.
Newly diagnosed neovascular age-related macular degeneration was associated with a substantial increase in total medical costs. Costs increased over time, reflecting growing use of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapies.
To determine whether there is an association between response to intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor agents and genotype in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Analysis of the current literature evaluating pharmacogenetics of treatment response in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Studies have demonstrated associations between various genotypes and response to intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor agents. Lower-risk genotypes of the CFH, ARMS2, HTRA1, and VEGF-A genes may be associated with improved visual outcomes. Additionally, frequency of injections may be associated with certain genotypes.
Genetic background may influence an individual's response to treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Further studies to investigate biologic pathways of neovascular age-related macular degeneration and gene products that are directly involved might lead to better understanding of contribution of various genes to treatment response.
Although the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is unclear, genetic screening has revealed that polymorphisms in the complement system may be associated with AMD development. Production of autoantibodies was also found in AMD patients. In this study, we analyzed the antibody response in AMD patients. We found that purified B cells from AMD patients tended to respond to lower concentrations of bacterial antigen stimulation, and produced higher amounts of antibodies, especially in IgM and IgA secretions. When examining clinical symptoms, patients with more severe wet-form AMD tended to exhibit higher sensitivity to bacterial antigens and secreted more IgM and IgA antibodies than those with less severe dry-form cases. In conclusion, our study discovered an altered B-cell antibody production in response to bacterial antigens in AMD patients, which potentially contributes to AMD pathogenesis.
To evaluate aflibercept treat-and-extend regimen for treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration in patients with limited response to ranibizumab.
This prospective single-arm trial included 33 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration pretreated with treat-and-extend regimen ranibizumab for ≥6 months who failed to be extended to a 6-week interval at least twice. All patients received aflibercept (2 mg/0.05 mL) at baseline, and were subsequently treated according to treat-and-extend regimen, starting with a 4-week interval and extending in 2-week steps. Evaluations included mean maximum recurrence-free treatment interval; best-corrected visual acuity; central retinal thickness; and pigment epithelium detachment height and horizontal diameter.
At Week 24, the maximum recurrence-free treatment interval increased to ≥6 weeks in ∼35% of patients, whereas the mean interval was 4.9 ± 1.3 weeks. Best-corrected visual acuity score remained stable, but significant reductions in central retinal thickness (P < 0.001) and pigment epithelium detachment height (P = 0.001) were observed compared with baseline, as was a small decrease in horizontal pigment epithelium detachment diameter (P = 0.035).
After switching patients with limited ranibizumab response to aflibercept, signs of choroidal neovascularization activity regressed, and an increased duration of treatment effects was seen in approximately one-third of lesions, but visual acuity was unchanged.
Charles Bonnet syndrome is a condition manifesting as visual hallucinations associated with vision impairment in patients without the underlying n euro psychiatric pathologies. As the incidence of age-related macular degeneration is on the rise, we can anticipate increasingly frequent cases of Charles Bonnet syndrome in our patients. The aim of the paper is to present a case of a 75-year-old patient who developed visual hallucinations secondarily to severe bilateral vision impairment due to exudative age-related macular degeneration. Patients with advanced age-related macular degeneration and no history of neuropsychiatric disorders may present with visual hallucinations.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a chronic progressive disease characterized by lesions in the central area of the retina. The pathogenesis of AMD involves aging-associated changes in the choriocapillaris, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), and in Bruch's membrane, but the mechanisms that trigger the conversion of normal age-related changes into the pathological process are not known. The result of pathological changes in the RPE and choroid is the death of photoreceptors and irreversible loss of vision. In spite of numerous studies on AMD pathogenesis, the information about the molecular genetic preconditions of events leading to the death of photoreceptors - as well as about the pathways of death - is extremely limited. This situation makes it difficult to identify effective treatments of AMD, in particular, the most common, i.e., atrophic («dry») form of the disease. Recent studies showed that not only proapoptotic but also necrosis-associated, and autophagy-related signaling pathways are involved in the death of retinal cells. This review summarizes the data available in the literature on the three basic types of cell death: apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagy and their role in the pathogenesis of AMD.
The purpose was to evaluate the effects of long-term anti-VEGF treatment on the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) and retinal ganglion cell layer (RGCL) thickness for patients with neovascular AMD and glaucoma.
Medical records of respective patients who had received more than 15 anti-VEGF injections were reviewed. Initial and latest SD-OCT macular scans were segmented and changes of the RNFL and RGCL thickness at the four outer ETDRS quadrants were evaluated. Secondary outcome measures included changes of visual field parameters seen in automated perimetry.
Sixteen patients were included (mean age 78 ± 6 years). The mean total number of anti-VEGF injections was 39 ± 16. The mean treatment duration was 6.1 ± 2.1 years. The mean IOP decreased from 18 ± 5 mmHg at baseline to 15 ± 5 mmHg at the last visit (p = 0.026). The mean RNFL thickness volume of the outer ETDRS quadrants (0.98 ± 0.18 mm<sup>3</sup> to 0.97 ± 0.18 mm<sup>3</sup> p = 0.61) and its average thickness (37.9 ± 7.3 μm to 37.2 ± 7.4 μm, p = 0.6) did not significantly change. However, the average RGCL thickness decreased significantly from 0.86 ± 0.12 mm<sup>3</sup> to 0.79 ± 0.11 mm<sup>3</sup> (p = 0.01), and from 27.7 ± 4.2 to 25.9 ± 3.7 μm (p = 0.01). Number of injections correlated with the RGCL change (r2 = 0.36, p = 0.01). The mean sensitivity, mean defect and absolute scotomata did not significantly change with p-values of 0.28, 0.21 and 0.07, respectively.
Patients under long term treatment with anti-VEGF and concurrent glaucoma show significant decrease in macular RGLC volume. However, this decrease is comparable to reported RGCL decrease in patients under anti-VEGF treatment without underlying glaucoma and suggests that glaucoma patients may not be at a higher risk for losing macular RNFL and RGCL, at least if adequate control of intraocular pressure is maintained.
To compare visually guided manual prehension in participants with primarily central field loss (CFL) due to age-related macular degeneration and peripheral visual field loss (PFL) due to glaucoma. This study extends current literature by comparing directly "reach-to-grasp" performance, and presents a new task of "transport-to-place" the object accurately to a new location. Data were compared to age-matched controls.
Three-dimensional motion data were collected from 17 glaucoma participants with PFL, 17 participants with age-related macular degeneration CFL and 10 age-matched control participants. Participants reached toward and grasped a cylindrical object (reach-to-grasp), and then transported and placed (transport-to-place) it at a different (predefined) peripheral location. Various kinematic indices were measured. Correlation analyses explored relationships between visual function and kinematic data.
In the reach-to-grasp phase, CFL patients exhibited significantly longer movement and reaction times when compared to PFL participants and controls. Central field loss participants also took longer to complete the movement and made more online movements in the latter part of the reach. During the transport-to-place phase, CFL participants showed increased deceleration times, longer movement trajectory, and increased vertical wrist displacement. Central field loss also showed higher errors in placing the object at a predefined location. A number of kinematic indices correlated significantly to central visual function indices (P < 0.05).
Significant differences in performance exist between CFL and PFL participants. Various indices correlated significantly with loss in acuity and contrast sensitivity (CS), suggesting that performance is more dependent on central visual function irrespective of underlying pathology.
The present study compared the efficacy of aflibercept for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (NV-AMD) in patients with complete ranibizumab resistance and tachyphylaxis.
Forty-four eyes of 38 neovascular age-related macular degeneration patients were evaluated. Eyes were divided into a complete resistance group (n=23 eyes) and tachyphylaxis group (n=21 eyes).
After three injections, eight (38.1%) patients in the tachyphylaxis group and nine (39.1%) in the complete resistance group presented with macular dryness. After the first injection of aflibercept, the mean visual acuity improved significantly in the tachyphylaxis group (p=0.018) but remained unchanged in the complete resistance group (p=0.37). There was a non-significant trend towards improved mean visual acuity in both groups after the second and third injections relative to the acuity at the final visit for ranibizumab treatment. In the tachyphylaxis group, the presence of subfoveal pigmented epithelium detachment (PED) decreased significantly after intravitreal aflibercept treatment.
Although treatment with aflibercept yielded generally positive anatomical results in both groups, no significant increase in visual acuity was achieved.
To investigate the interactions among multimodal imaging findings and multimodal vision testing in neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Patients enrolled in a prospective study of neovascular age-related macular degeneration with at least 3 previous intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections. Each patient underwent multimodal fundus imaging including spectral domain optical coherence tomography and fundus autofluorescence, and multimodal vision testing, including visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, reading speed, and microperimetry.
There were 73 eyes of 49 consecutive patients enrolled. Generalized estimating equations' modelling showed that the significant independent predictors of visual acuity were the area of confluent hypoautofluorescence and involvement of the foveal center with either granular or confluent hypoautofluorescence (P < 0.001). Contrast sensitivity was negatively correlated with the area of confluent hypoautofluorescence (P < 0.001), involvement of the foveal center with granular hypoautofluorescence (P = 0.017), and subfoveal choroidal thickness (P = 0.042). The only significant predictor of reading speed was the size of confluent hypoautofluorescence (P < 0.001). The size of the defect in the ellipsoid zone (P < 0.001) and the presence of intraretinal fluid (P = 0.045) were correlated with microperimetry score.
Confluent absence of autofluorescence was a highly significant predictor of vision testing and serves as an easy parameter to obtain in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading disease associated with blindness. It has a high incidence and complex pathogenesis. We aimed to study the metabolomic characteristics in Chinese patients with wet AMD by analyzing the morning plasma of 20 healthy controls and 20 wet AMD patients for metabolic differences.
We used ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography and quadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometry for this analysis. The relationship of these differences with AMD pathophysiology was also assessed. Remaining data were normalized using Pareto scaling, and then valid data were handled using multivariate data analysis with MetaboAnalysis software, including unsupervised principal component analysis and supervised partial least squares-discriminate analysis. The purpose of the present work was to identify significant metabolites for the analyses. Hierarchical clustering was conducted to identify metabolites that differed between the two groups. Significant metabolites were then identified using the established database, and features were mapped on the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes.
A total of 5443 ion peaks were detected, all of them attributable to the same 10 metabolites. These included some amino acids, isomaltose, hydrocortisone, and biliverdin. The heights of these peaks differed significantly between the two groups. The biosynthesis of amino acids pathways also differed profoundly between patients with wet AMD and controls.
These findings suggested that metabolic profiles and and pathways differed between wet AMD and controls and may provide promising new targets for AMD-directed therapeutics and diagnostics.
The aim of this study was to clarify the 1-year outcomes of pro re nata (PRN) and bimonthly intravitreal injections of aflibercept (IVA) for typical neovascular age-related macular degeneration (tAMD) after the initial 3 monthly IVA.
We conducted a prospective, interventional study. Fifty-eight treatment-naïve patients with tAMD were randomly assigned to the PRN (30 patients) or the bimonthly (28 patients) treatment group. Both groups initially received 3 monthly IVA. Visual acuity, central macular retinal thickness (CRT), and central choroidal thickness (CCT) were evaluated at 12 months. Subanalysis was performed to identify factors associated with the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA).
BCVA was significantly improved only in the bimonthly group at 12 months. CRT and CCT were significantly decreased in both groups. Subanalysis showed that the only factor associated with BCVA improvement at 12 months was the existence of pigment epithelial detachment at baseline.
BCVA showed significant improvement only in the bimonthly group but not in the PRN group at 12 months.
Tetracyclines, especially doxycycline, play a role in the regulation of inflammation, immunomodulation, cell proliferation, and angiogenesis. Treatment of corneal angiogenesis or choroidal neovascularization with tetracyclines has been shown to be effective in animal models. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of oral doxycycline in reducing the total number of intraocular injections needed for controlling neovascular age-related macular degeneration in human patients. In this interventional case series, 28 random consecutive patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration from Farabi Eye Hospital, Tehran, Iran were treated for 4 months with 200 mg doxycycline once a day after the first intravitreal bevacizumab injection in addition to standard therapy in agreement with as-needed regimen. After 12 months of follow-up, total number of injections, foveal thickness and visual acuity were compared to those at baseline and of similar studies. Similar to standard treatment, co-treatment with doxycycline was able to control active disease (intraretinal or subretinal fluid or leakage, new-onset of macular hemorrhage, and reduction of visual acuity more than 5 letters based on Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study [ETDRS] charts) yet with fewer injections (for current study and standard treatment, respectively 3.14 vs. 5.92, P < 0.001). Furthermore, while better control of the foveal thickness was achieved (P < 0.001), vision improvement was similar to that achieved with standard therapy (P > 0.05). If confirmed in larger studies, the findings of this interventional case series could provide a strategy to control neovascular age-related macular degeneration with fewer intraocular bevacizumab injections by co-administering a well-known oral agent-doxycycline.
This work was undertaken to analyze the efficacy of switchback from aflibercept to ranibizumab in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) who had previously switched from ranibizumab to aflibercept.
This retrospective double-center study included 45 patients with nAMD who were previously treated with ranibizumab, then aflibercept, and then ranibizumab again, regardless of the number of intravitreal injections received. The primary outcome was change in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) measured on the Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study ETDRS chart before (T0) and after (T1) the switch, and 3 months after the switchback (T2). Secondary outcomes included changes in central foveal thickness (CFT) measured at T0, T1, and T2, as analyzed on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), and the percentage of patients gaining five letters or better.
Forty-seven eyes of 45 patients were switched back from aflibercept to ranibizumab. The mean BCVA was 67.4 ± 13.4 at T0, 66.7 ± 14.4 at T1, and 68.2 ± 13.9 at T2. BCVA was significantly improved between T1 and T2 (p = 0.0230), but not between T0 and T1 (p = 0.5153) or between T0 and T2 (p = 0.4248). The mean CFT decreased from 317.8 μm ± 89.6 at T0 to 306.9 μm ±68.0 at T1, and to 291.2 μm ± 76.6 at T2. The decrease in CFT was not statistically significant between either T0 and T1 or T1 and T2, but was significant between T0 and T2, when compared before switch and after switchback (p = 0.0027). However, when considering eyes that received three or more consecutive intravitreal injections of aflibercept before switchback, the statistical significance between T1 and T2 was lost, although a trend towards significance remained (p = 0.06). Thirteen eyes (27.7 %) gained five letters or more (range, 5-15 letters) after switchback.
A short-term benefit of switchback from one anti-VEGF agent to another was observed in patients with nAMD who had shown no benefit from the initial switch.
To assess whether Tie2-mediated vascular stabilization ameliorates neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD), we investigated the impact of adeno-associated virus-mediated gene therapy with cartilage oligomeric matrix protein angiopoietin-1 (AAV2.COMP-Ang1) on choroidal neovascularization (CNV), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) in a mouse model of the disease. We treated mice with subretinal injections of AAV2.COMP-Ang1 or control (AAV2.AcGFP, AAV2.LacZ, and phosphate-buffered saline). Subretinal AAV2 localization and plasmid protein expression was verified in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)/choroid of mice treated with all AAV2 constructs. Laser-assisted simulation of neovascular AMD was performed and followed by quantification of HIF, VEGF, and CNV in each experimental group. We found that AAV2.COMP-Ang1 was associated with a significant reduction in VEGF levels (29-33%, p < 0.01) and CNV volume (60-70%, p < 0.01), without a concomitant decrease in HIF1-α, compared to all controls. We concluded that a) AAV2 is a viable vector for delivering COMP-Ang1 to subretinal tissues, b) subretinal COMP-Ang1 holds promise as a prospective treatment for neovascular AMD, and c) although VEGF suppression in the RPE/choroid may be one mechanism by which AAV2.COMP-Ang1 reduces CNV, this therapeutic effect may be hypoxia-independent. Taken together, these findings suggest that AAV2.COMP-Ang1 has potential to serve as an alternative or complementary option to anti-VEGF agents for the long-term amelioration of neovascular AMD.
To describe the prevalence of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) among older adults in rural southern mainland China.
Eligible persons aged 50 years or over were identified by geographically defined cluster sampling from Yangxi County, Guangdong Province, China. Participants underwent a standardised interview and comprehensive eye examinations from August to November in 2014. Digital retinal photographs were graded for AMD lesions using the Clinical Classification of Age-Related Macular Degeneration developed by the Beckman Initiative for Macular Research Classification Committee. Age-standardised prevalence of AMD and AMD lesions was calculated using the 2010 world population data and compared with those of other populations.
Of 5825 subjects who participated (90.7% response rate), 4881 (83.8%) had fundus photographs gradable for AMD. Early, intermediate and late AMD were present in 2003 (41.0%), 879 (18.0%) and 42 (0.86%) participants. The age-standardised prevalence of early, intermediate and late AMD was 40.4% (95% CI 39.6% to 41.2%), 17.6% (95% CI 17.0% to 18.2%) and 0.79% (95% CI 0.65% to 0.95%), respectively. Total AMD was more prevalent in men than in women (62.8% vs 57.1%).
AMD is an important public health concern for rural southern China, and the prevalence of AMD was higher in men than in women.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of irreversible, severe vision loss in Western countries. Recently, we identified a novel pathway involving P2X7 receptor scavenger function expressed on ocular immune cells as a risk factor for advanced AMD. In this study, we investigate the effect of loss of P2X7 receptor function on retinal structure and function during aging. P2X7-null and wild-type C57bl6J mice were investigated at 4, 12, and 18 months of age for macrophage phagocytosis activity, ocular histological changes, and retinal function. Phagocytosis activity of blood-borne macrophages decreased with age at 18 months in the wild-type mouse. Lack of P2X7 receptor function reduced phagocytosis at all ages compared to wild-type mice. At 12 months of age, P2X7-null mice had thickening of Bruchs membrane and retinal pigment epithelium dysfunction. By 18 months of age, P2X7-null mice displayed phenotypic characteristics consistent with early AMD, including Bruchs membrane thickening, retinal pigment epithelium cell loss, retinal functional deficits, and signs of subretinal inflammation. Our present study shows that loss of function of the P2X7 receptor in mice induces retinal changes representing characteristics of early AMD, providing a valuable model for investigating the role of scavenger receptor function and the immune system in the development of this age-related disease.
To determine which patients respond best to stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) for neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Participants (n = 230) receiving intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections for neovascular age-related macular degeneration enrolled in a randomized, double-masked sham-controlled trial comparing 16 Gray, 24 Gray, or Sham SRT. In a post hoc analysis, participants were grouped according to their baseline characteristics, to determine if these influenced SRT efficacy.
At 52 weeks, SRT was most effective for lesions ≤4 mm in greatest linear dimension and with a macular volume greater than the median value of 7.4 mm. For 26% of the participants with both these characteristics, SRT resulted in 55% fewer ranibizumab injections (2.08 vs. 4.60; P = 0.0002), a mean visual acuity change that was 5.33 letters superior to sham (+2.18 vs. -3.15 letters; P = 0.0284), and a 71.1-μm greater reduction in mean central subfield thickness (-122.6 vs. -51.5 μm; P = 0.027). Other features associated with a positive response to SRT included pigment epithelial detachment and the absence of fibrosis.
Stereotactic radiotherapy is most effective for neovascular age-related macular degeneration lesions that are actively leaking at the time of treatment, and no larger than the 4-mm treatment zone.
Since some studies have reported differences in the association of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) with biological sex, we set out to determine whether the difference in the disease susceptibility is afforded by common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with AMD.
We genotyped 2067 Caucasian subjects from the Age-Related Eye Disease Study cohort for commonly associated AMD SNPs, including those in CFH (rs1061170, rs1410996, and rs3766404), ARMS2 (rs10490924), and C3 (rs2230199) using either a Sequenom MassARRAY MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer or using Taqman genotyping reagents. A Cox proportional hazards model was used to determine the effect of genotype, age, sex, and smoking status on the development of AMD.
All tested SNPs genotyped are associated strongly with AMD (p < 0.0001), in concordance with previous studies. However, we found no observable differences in any of the SNPs studied when categorized by sex. Interactions between SNPs and sex were found to be not statistically significant (p = 0.38-0.79).
The difference between male and female incidence of AMD is not explained by the most commonly AMD-associated SNPs, though it does not exclude the possibility that other, less common SNPs contribute to this difference.
To determine changes in quality of life measures when choroidal neovascularization (CNV) developed in the second eye of patients with initially unilateral neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
We analyzed responses to the 39-item National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire (NEI-VFQ), 36-item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36), and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) at baseline, and prior to and following second eye CNV diagnosis in 92 participants enrolled in two Submacular Surgery Trials. Paired t-tests for sample sizes over 30 and Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for sample sizes <30 were performed to compare scores.
CNV development resulted in statistically and clinically significant changes in responses to 20 of 39 NEI-VFQ items, indicating visual function decline during a mean interval of 25 months. Little difference was noted between baseline scores and prior to CNV diagnosis, which averaged 8.9 months duration. Subscales demonstrated a statistically significant decline in general vision, near activities, distance activities, social functioning, role difficulties, dependency, and driving. There were minimal changes in the HADS and SF-36 scales.
CNV development in the second eye had a dramatic effect on visual functioning based on patient responses to the NEI-VFQ questionnaire. Our investigation is believed to be the first study using data collected prospectively to demonstrate vision-related quality of life changes that resulted from development of CNV in AMD patients.
To investigate the association of posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) with aqueous levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in eyes with exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
This is a prospective comparative study. Subjects are 33 eyes with exudative AMD. PVD was examined by B-mode ultrasonography and the subjects were divided into a complete PVD group (PVD group) or a group with partial or no PVD (without PVD group). At the beginning of intravitreal injection of ranibizumab, aqueous humor was collected and the concentration of VEGF was measured using ELISA. The concentration was compared between the two groups.
Complete PVD was observed in 13 (39 %) eyes. The mean concentration of VEGF was 58 pg/ml in the PVD group and 91 pg/ml in the without PVD group. Multiple regression analysis revealed that the concentration of VEGF was significantly lower in the eyes with PVD than in those without PVD independent of age and sex (P = 0.02).
Complete PVD is related to the lower concentration of aqueous VEDF in AMD eyes.
To evaluate the efficacy of intravitreal therapies in cases of atrophic age-related macular degeneration (AMD) with subretinal or intraretinal fluid.
A retrospective review was made of the clinical charts of patients diagnosed with atrophic AMD with subretinal or intraretinal fluid. Fundus photographs and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography images were examined, and an analysis was made on the presence of fluid and its density. Neovascularisation was ruled out by fluorescein and/or indocyanine green angiography.
The study included 14 eyes from 13 patients with a mean age of 72.64 years and a mean follow-up of 80.5 weeks. Intraretinal fluid was observed in 6 eyes (42.9%), while subretinal fluid was shown in 8 eyes (57.1%), with high density in 4 eyes (28.5%), and low density in 4 eyes (28.5%). Snellen best-corrected visual acuity improved from 0.37 at baseline to 0.56 at the final visit (P=.002). Central subfield thickness (microns) significantly decreased (P<.001) from 291.0 at baseline to 228.9 at the final visit. Eight eyes received ranibizumab, 5eyes received bevacizumab, and one case received triamcinolone.
Cases of atrophic AMD may present with subretinal or intraretinal fluid in the absence Neovascularisation. Further studies are required to analyse the value of this finding as a risk factor of developing advanced forms of AMD, as well as the efficacy of intravitreal therapies.
The purpose of the present study is to compare the responses to ranibizumab between wet age-related macular degeneration patients, with and without accompanying vitreomacular traction syndrome.
Our database of optical coherence tomography files was searched for eyes of age-related macular degeneration patients that had been treated with ranibizumab, and that had evidence of vitreomacular traction. A control group was selected from the same database for comparison. The case history of each selected individual was reviewed for data regarding the evolution of visual acuity in that patient, and the number of intravitreal injections that had been required to date.
From a database of 373 eyes, clear images of vitreomacular traction were obtained for a total of 18 eyes. The mean follow-up period was 20.6 months (SD=10.6, range=10.4-31.7). Patients in the vitreomacular traction group had been given an average of 5.1 injections versus an average of 4.2 injections in patients in the control group. The mean changes in visual acuity (which was measured using ETDRS charts) were -15 letters and -4 letters in the vitreomacular traction and control groups (P=.07), respectively.
After ranibizumab treatment, age-related macular degeneration patients with accompanying vitreomacular traction showed a tendency to have a poorer prognosis in terms of visual acuity than patients without this finding. In addition, higher numbers of intravitreal injections were required to obtain clinical responses in patients with vitreomacular traction.
Telomere attrition and corresponding cellular senescence of the retinal pigment epithelium contribute to the changes of age-related macular degeneration. Activation of the enzyme telomerase can add telomeric DNA to retinal pigment epithelium chromosomal ends and has been proposed as a treatment for age-related macular degeneration. We report the use of a small molecule, oral telomerase activator (TA)-65 in early macular degeneration. This study, focusing on early macular degeneration, provides a model for the use of TAs in age-related disease.
Thirty-eight (38) patients were randomly assigned to a 1-year, double-blinded, placebo-controlled interventional study with arms for oral TA-65 or placebo. Macular functions via micro-perimetry were the primary measured outcomes.
The macular function in the arm receiving the TA-65 showed significant improvement relative to the placebo control. The improvement was manifest at 6 months and was maintained at 1 year: macular threshold sensitivity (measured as average dB [logarithmic decibel scale of light attenuation]) improved 0.97 dB compared to placebo (P-value 0.02) and percent reduced thresholds lessened 8.2% compared to the placebo arm (P-value 0.04).
The oral TA significantly improved the macular function of treatment subjects compared to controls. Although this study was a pilot and a larger study is being planned, it is noteworthy in that it is, to our knowledge, the first randomized placebo-controlled study of a TA supplement.
The aim was to investigate factors influencing a patient's self-recognition of the recurrence of exudative changes secondary to age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
In this retrospective study, we reviewed medical records for patients with exudative AMD who were diagnosed with a recurrence of exudation. Various parameters were compared, including age, sex, diagnosis, spectacle use, visual acuity before and after the recurrence and the extent of the decrease in visual acuity. In addition, visual acuity and unaided vision before the recurrence were compared in patients who did not use eyeglasses.
Forty-eight eyes from 48 patients were included in the analysis. Twenty-seven patients (56.3 per cent) identified a decrease in visual acuity. These patients had better visual acuity before the recurrence (p = 0.023) and reported a greater decrease in visual acuity (p = 0.005) than patients who did not identify a visual change. Patients who wore spectacles were also more likely to notice the change in their visual acuity (p = 0.027). Visual acuity was significantly better than uncorrected vision (p < 0.001).
Patients who do not use eyeglasses or who have relatively poor vision tend not to promptly recognise visual deterioration caused by the recurrence of exudation. Prescribing eyeglasses may facilitate accurate self-recognition of the recurrence of exudation in cases where vision can be improved with correction.
Describing the natural course of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) is essential in discussing prognosis and treatment options with patients and to support cost-effectiveness studies.
First, we performed a literature search in PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane. We included randomized clinical trials and prospective observational studies reporting visual acuity (VA) in non-treated patients, 24 studies in total. We integrated VA data using best fit on Lineweaver-Burke plots and modelled with non-linear regression using reciprocal terms. Second, we performed a quality-of-life (QoL) study in nAMD patients. We measured VA with Radner reading charts and QoL with the Health Utilities Index issue 3 (HUI-3) questionnaire in 184 participants. We studied the relation VA-QoL with linear regression. Third, with Monte Carlo simulation, we integrated the VA model from the literature review and the relation VA-QoL from the QoL study.
Visual acuity was 0.4 and 0.07 after 5 years in the better-seeing, and worse-seeing eye, respectively. After 4.3 years, VA was <0.5 in the better-seeing eye; <0.3 after 7 years; 0.05 after 17 years. QoL score decreased from 0.6 to 0.45 after 10 years.
The natural course of nAMD in both eyes needs to be considered when informing patients. Visual acuity in the best eye decreases to below 0.5 in 4.3 years. This affects QoL significantly.
To evaluate the effect of epiretinal membranes (ERMs), detected with spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), on the outcome of antivascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD).
A total of 434 eyes with treatment-naive nAMD were retrospectively included and analyzed. All patients were administered an initial series of 3 monthly loading injections of ranibizumab or aflibercept, followed by further injections as required. The visual and anatomical outcomes were compared between the eyes with ERMs and those without. Features of ERMs at baseline assessed with SD-OCT were evaluated and correlated with visual outcomes.
Sixty-eight eyes (15.7%) with nAMD presented ERMs at baseline. The mean best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of these eyes, expressed as the logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution, improved from 0.75 ± 0.48 (Snellen equivalent: 20/112) to 0.59 ± 0.44 (20/77) after 12 months of treatment (P = 0.021). Central foveal thickness also decreased from 381 ± 191 μm to 294 ± 167 μm (P < 0.001). Compared to the eyes without ERMs (366 eyes), the eyes with ERMs had a significantly thicker central fovea after treatment (P = 0.020). However, the intergroup differences in BCVA improvement were not significant. No significant association was found between visual outcome after treatment and ERM features on OCT at baseline.
In eyes with nAMD, ERMs were infrequent. Central foveal thickness was significantly greater after anti-VEGF treatment in eyes with nAMD and ERMs. However, the presence of ERMs in eyes with nAMD did not affect visual outcome.
Late neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nvAMD) is very common and causes irreversible severe visual loss unless treated swiftly with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors. Although publicly subsidized access to treatment may be inequitable, which is why we assessed treatment provision across Australia.
Secondary analysis of Australian data.
All Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (including Repatriation PBS) beneficiaries.
Treatment and incidence data were obtained from Medicare Australia, the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists, Optometry Australia, the Blue Mountains Eye Study and the Australian Bureau of Statistics. Data were mapped using geographical information software, and factors associated with treatment provision were assessed using multiple linear regression models.
Unmet need (%) for anti-VEGF treatment for nvAMD.
On average, we estimated 7316 incident cases of nvAMD not to be treated per year from 2010 to 2014 (50.1% of total). Number of ophthalmologists and optometrists (per 1000, β = -0.024; 95% confidence interval [CI] -0.041, -0.007) and being located in remote regions (β = 0.186; 95% CI 0.110, 0.262) were associated with percentage of untreated cases. A higher proportion of the population speaking a language other than English at home was associated in univariate analyses only (β = 0.0015; 95% CI -0.0004, 0.0027; P = 0.007).
A large proportion of incident nvAMD is not treated with anti-VEGF. Not receiving treatment is more likely in regional or remote areas and areas with fewer service providers. Not speaking English at home may further limit access. Service delivery models for more equitable service provision are needed.
Vascular endothelial growth factor antibody therapy is an established treatment of exsudative age-related macular degeneration.
The morphologic characterisation of the macular microvasculature after longstanding treatment.
Forty-eight patients (34 women and 14 men; age, 74.4 ± 8.0 years) were enrolled in the study. During follow-up time (53.8 ± 31.0 months), 7.6 ± 4.9 injections were administered in 56 eyes. Optical coherence tomography angiographic examination was performed with AngioVue (Optovue Inc. Fremont, CA, USA).
Distortion of the superficial retinal plexus and foveal avascular zone enlargement were noted in 5/56 eyes, deep retinal plexus defect was detected in 9/56 cases. Destruction of the choriocapillaries and the former neovascularisation could be found in 4 different patterns: 1. pigment epithelium and choriocapillary atrophy, 2. submacular scar, 3. active leaking choroidal neovascularisation, 4. intraretinal cysts.
Optical coherence tomography angiography is a novel non-invasive method, which enables the follow up of macular degeneration. Orv. Hetil., 2016, 157(42), 1683-1690.
To study the qualitative and quantitative features of choroidal neovascular (NV) membranes in age-related macular degeneration using optical coherence tomography angiography in patients with active and quiescent NV lesions before and after treatment with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor.
Macular optical coherence tomography angiography images were obtained using RTVue XR Avanti with AngioVue. Morphologic features and quantitative measurements of the NV lesion were analyzed using en face projection images. The NV lesion was subdivided into inner segment and outer fringe for further fractal dimension analysis.
In a series of 31 eyes, 11 eyes with active NV lesions at baseline and after consecutive follow-up after treatment with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy and 20 eyes with quiescent NV lesions were included in this study. Morphologically, all the quiescent NV lesions versus 63.6% of the active NV lesions demonstrated a prominent central vessel and active leasions demonstrated a greater rate of small vessels branching (82%) and peripheral arcades (82%) than quiescent lesions (30% and 40% respectively) and this was statistically significant. The lesion area and vessel density was not statistically significantly different after treatment or versus quiescent lesions although the latter lesions were reduced in area. Lesion pattern complexity measured by the fractal dimension was statistically significantly lower in the inner part of the lesion after treatment and statistically significantly lower in the total lesion of the quiescent NV compared with the active NV.
Optical coherence tomography angiography is a new, noninvasive imaging modality that can be used to perform qualitative and quantitative analyses of NV lesions. In the future, OCT angiography may provide biomarkers of activity and guide the evaluation and treatment and monitoring of neovascularization in age-related macular degeneration.
Studies on people with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) have shown that they are able to detect briefly displayed objects and scenes with high accuracy (above 80%). However, in everyday life we explore our environment to search and to recognize objects. We assessed visual exploration in people with AMD during the identification of objects and scenes.
Twenty patients with AMD, fifteen age-matched and twelve young controls participated. We used colored photographs of isolated objects, natural scenes and objects in scenes, displayed centrally on a monitor. Participants were asked to name the objects and scenes. Ocular movements were recorded during the identification task. Scan paths, saccades, fixations, and accuracy were also recorded.
People with AMD exhibited lower accuracy (by about 30%). Eye movement parameters were impaired with a larger number of saccades, shorter fixation durations and a larger scan path than controls.
Our results are consistent with studies on artificial scotoma in normally sighted people showing that a central scotoma impairs oculomotricity. In contrast to detection tasks, people with central vision loss exhibit impaired performance in identification of objects and scenes (62 to 66%). Eye movement studies suggest that the lower accuracy in patients is likely due to the use of peripheral vision and instability of fixation.
To study choriocapillaris (CC) flow in eyes with Type 3 neovascularization (NV) and age-related macular degeneration, using optical coherence tomography angiography analysis.
In this multicenter, retrospective, observational study, we collected data from 21 patients with unilateral Type 3 NV and age-related macular degeneration, based on clinical examination, structural optical coherence tomography, and fluorescein angiography when available. An additional group of 20 nonneovascular age-related macular degeneration eyes with unilateral Type 1 or Type 2 NV due to age-related macular degeneration was included for comparison. En face optical coherence tomography angiography imaging (3 × 3 mm scans) with quantitative microvascular analysis of the CC was performed. Main outcome measures were: 1) the percent nonperfused choriocapillaris area; and 2) the average CC signal void size.
We included 21 patients with unilateral Type 3 NV (15 female, 71.5%) and 20 patients with unilateral Type 1 or 2 NV (9 female, 45.0% P = 0.118). Mean ± SD age was 82.1 ± 7.4 years in the unilateral Type 3 patients and 78.3 ± 8.1 in unilateral Type 1/2 NV subjects (P = 0.392). The percent nonperfused choriocapillaris area was 56.3 ± 8.1% in eyes with Type 3 NV and 51.9 ± 4.3% in the fellow eyes (P = 0.016). The average signal void size was also increased in those eyes with Type 3 NV (939.9 ± 680.9 μm), compared with the fellow eyes (616.3 ± 304.2 μm, P = 0.039). The number of signal voids was reduced in the Type 3 NV eyes (604.5 ± 282.9 vs. 747.3 ± 195.8, P = 0.046). The subfoveal choroidal thickness was 135.9 ± 54.2 μm in eyes with Type 3 NV and 167.2 ± 65.4 μm in the fellow eyes (P = 0.003). In addition, the fellow eyes of patients with unilateral Type 3 NV displayed more significant CC flow abnormalities versus the fellow eyes with unilateral Type 1/2 NV (percent nonperfused choriocapillaris area = 51.9 ± 4.3% vs. 46.0 ± 2.1%, respectively, P < 0.0001; and average signal void size 616.3 ± 304.2 μm versus 351.4 ± 65.5 μm, respectively, P < 0.0001; and number of signal voids 747.3 ± 195.8 vs. 998.5 ± 147.3, respectively, P < 0.0001).
Eyes with unilateral Type 3 NV illustrated increased CC nonperfusion versus fellow nonneovascular eyes. These results suggest that choroidal ischemia may play an important role in the development of Type 3 NV.
Age-related macular degeneration is a major cause of blindness worldwide. With ageing populations in many countries, more than 20% might have the disorder. Advanced age-related macular degeneration, including neovascular age-related macular degeneration (wet) and geographic atrophy (late dry), is associated with substantial, progressive visual impairment. Major risk factors include cigarette smoking, nutritional factors, cardiovascular diseases, and genetic markers, including genes regulating complement, lipid, angiogenic, and extracellular matrix pathways. Some studies have suggested a declining prevalence of age-related macular degeneration, perhaps due to reduced exposure to modifiable risk factors. Accurate diagnosis combines clinical examination and investigations, including retinal photography, angiography, and optical coherence tomography. Dietary anti-oxidant supplementation slows progression of the disease. Treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration incorporates intraocular injections of anti-VEGF agents, occasionally combined with other modalities. Evidence suggests that two commonly used anti-VEGF therapies, ranibizumab and bevacizumab, have similar efficacy, but possible differences in systemic safety are difficult to assess. Future treatments include inhibition of other angiogenic factors, and regenerative and topical therapies.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD), widely prevalent across the globe, is a major stakeholder among adult visual morbidity and blindness, not only in the Western world but also in Asia. Several risk factors have been identified, including critical genetic factors, which were never imagined 2 decades ago. The etiopathogenesis is emerging to demonstrate that immune and complement-related inflammation pathway members chronically exposed to environmental insults could justifiably influence disease morbidity and treatment outcomes. Approximately half a dozen physiological and biochemical cascades are disrupted in the AMD disease genesis, eventually leading to the distortion and disruption of the subretinal space, subretinal pigment epithelium, and Bruch membrane, thus setting off chaos and disorder for signs and symptoms to manifest. Approximately 3 dozen genetic factors have so far been identified, including the recent ones, through powerful genomic technologies and large robust sample sizes. The noteworthy genetic variants (common and rare) are complement factor H, complement factor H-related genes 1 to 5, C3, C9, ARMS2/HTRA1, vascular endothelial growth factor A, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2/KDR, and rare variants (show causal link) such as TIMP3, fibrillin, COL4A3, MMP19, and MMP9. Despite the enormous amount of scientific information generated over the years, diagnostic genetic or biomarker tests are still not available for clinicians to understand the natural course of the disease and its management in a patient. However, further research in the field should reduce this gap not only by aiding the clinician but also through the possibilities of clinical intervention with complement pathway-related inhibitors entering preclinical and clinical trials in the near future. 
We have recently identified homeostatic alterations in the circulating T cells of patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD). In cultures of retinal pigment epithelial cells, we have demonstrated that T-cell-derived cytokines induced the upregulation of complement, chemokines and other proteins implicated in AMD pathogenesis. The purpose of this study was to test whether increased plasma levels of cytokines were present in patients with AMD.
We conducted a case-control study. Age-related macular degeneration status was assessed using standardized multimodal imaging techniques. Plasma was isolated from freshly drawn peripheral venous blood samples and analysed for interleukin (IL)15, IL18, interferon (IFN)γ, soluble tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor II (sTNFRII) and complement factor H (CFH) Y402H genotype.
We included 136 individuals with early or late forms of AMD and 74 controls. Significantly increased levels of sTNFRII were observed in patients with early or exudative AMD (p < 0.01). After adjusting for CFH Y402H genotype, age, sex and smoking history, the level of sTNFRII remained a significant predictor for prevalence of AMD with odds ratios at 3.0 in the middle and 3.6 in the highest tertiles. Levels of IL15, IL18 and IFNγ were low and not associated with AMD.
Increased plasma level of sTNFRII is found to be associated with AMD. The data supports the observations of low-grade, systemic inflammatory alterations in patients with AMD. However, it remains to be determined whether increased levels of TNFα can be found, which directly reflects an increased activity of macrophages and T cells.
To investigate longitudinal changes of outer nuclear layer (ONL) thickness in patients with retinal pigment epithelium tears secondary to neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
This is an institutional retrospective interventional case series. Twenty-six eyes of 22 patients with retinal pigment epithelium tears identified between April 2009 and March 2015. The patients underwent intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor agents as needed. Volume scans of optical coherence tomography at first diagnosis of tear (baseline) and after 12 months were analyzed. Outer nuclear layer was segmented, and average ONL thickness inside the tear area, at the border of the tear, and in areas outside the tear was measured. Change of ONL thickness. We also explored several factors for their association with ONL thinning including tear area, number of treatments, and the duration with persistent subretinal fluid.
Thinning of ONL was found in all the investigated areas (P < 0.01, respectively). Among the investigated factors, larger tear area was associated with greater ONL thinning outside the tear area (standardized β = -0.37, P = 0.030), and younger age was associated with greater ONL thinning inside the tear area (standardized β = 0.37, P = 0.041).
After an retinal pigment epithelium tear, thinning of ONL occurs in the area devoid of retinal pigment epithelium and also in adjacent areas. Few factors were predictive for the degree of ONL thinning. These results provide new insight in disease progression of this particular neovascular age-related macular degeneration subphenotype.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of severe, irreversible vision loss in older adults. Evidence for an association between AMD and mortality remains inconclusive despite evidence for an association with cardiovascular and inflammatory diseases. We aim to compare all-cause, cardiovascular and cancer mortality between those with early or late AMD and control study participants.
A protocol was registered at PROSPERO (CRD42015020622). A systematic search of Medline (Ovid), PubMed, and Embase (Ovid) was conducted on 6 June 2015. Reference lists from identified studies and four clinical trial registries were searched for additional studies. Participants were required to be over the age of 40 years, and AMD status must have been objectively assessed. The Risk Of Bias In Non-Randomized Studies - of Interventions (ROBINS-I) tool was used to assess the risk of bias. Random-effects meta-analyses were performed.
A total of 12 reports from 10 studies were included in the meta-analysis. Late AMD was associated with elevated rates of all-cause (nine studies, hazard ratio (HR) 1.20, 95% confidence interval, CI, 1.02-1.41) and cardiovascular mortality (six studies, HR 1.46, 95% CI 1.13-1.98), but early AMD was not (all-cause mortality, 10 studies, HR 1.06, 95% CI 0.98-1.14; cardiovascular mortality, five studies, HR 1.12, 95% CI 0.96-1.31). There was no evidence of an association between early or late AMD and cancer mortality (early AMD, three studies, HR 1.17, 95% CI 0.78-1.75; late AMD, three studies, HR 1.01, 95% CI 0.77-1.33).
Late AMD is associated with increased rates of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality, suggesting shared pathways between late AMD and systemic disease.
To compare the published results of studies on the genotype association of ARMS2/LOC387715 A69S, CFH Y402H, and CFH I62V in cases diagnosed as retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) versus neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) or healthy controls.
Heterogeneity of studies was evaluated using Cochran's Q test and I-square index. To modify the heterogeneity in the variables, we used random effects model. Meta-analysis was performed using STATA.
Four studies were included with 1076 neovascular AMD patients, 222 RAP cases, and 2276 control subjects. Pooled overall odds ratios for RAP/AMD were 1.15 (95% CI 0.60-2.18) for GT versus GG, 3.52 (95% CI 1.25-9.91) for TT versus GG ARMS2, 0.98 (95% CI 0.22-4.29) for GA versus AA, 1.00 (95% CI 0.25-4.02) for GG versus AA CFHI62V, 0.57 (95% CI 0.35-0.93) for CT versus TT CFH Y402H, and 0.40 (95% CI 0.22-0.74) for CC versus TT CFH Y402H. Regression analysis showed that ARMS2 TT genotype has a statistically significant effect on RAP versus AMD compared to CFH genotypes (P < 0.001).
This meta-analysis disclosed a stronger effect of ARMS2 genotypes in RAP cases compared with CFH Y402H and I62V genotypes.
To compare optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) with traditional multimodal imaging in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration in terms of guiding the treatment decision.
Prospective case series of 80 eyes of 73 consecutive patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration (39 women, mean age: 79.4 ± 5.3 years) diagnosed with different types of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) (58 Type I, 2 Type II, 6 mixed Type I and II, 3 retinal angiomatous proliferation, and 11 age-related macular degeneration-related polyps). The data obtained from traditional multimodal imaging, based on fluorescein angiography, indocyanine green angiography, and OCT were used to assess the need for treatment, those obtained from OCTA to identify two different patterns of CNV. Traditional multimodal imaging and OCTA findings were then compared with evaluate possible correspondence between treatment decision and CNV aspect on OCTA.
A CNV lesion was identified as Group A (requiring treatment) in 58 eyes (72.5%) in traditional multimodal imaging. On OCTA in 59 eyes (73.7%), the lesion was defined as Pattern I and the remaining 21 (26.3%) as Pattern II. There was 94.9% correspondence between the Pattern I CNV on OCTA and the cases Group A on conventional multimodal imaging. It was also computed 90.5% correspondence between Pattern II CNV on OCTA and the Group B (not requiring treatment) cases on conventional multimodal imaging. There was high (P < 0.05) interobserver agreement both for treatment decision in conventional multimodal and for Patterns (I or II) defining on OCTA imaging analysis.
This study demonstrates a high level of correspondence, in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration, between different CNV patterns identified on OCTA and treatment decisions established on conventional multimodal imaging. Although fluorescein angiography remains the gold standard for determining the presence of leakage, and OCT shows fluid accumulation and its variations, OCTA may now offer noninvasive monitoring of the CNV, aiding for each treatment decision during the follow-up.
Many retinal specialists have utilized intravitreal bevacizumab as an anti-VEGF to treat choroidal neovascularization (CNV), secondary to age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and pathological myopia, with favorable results. Bevacizumab is currently approved only for the systemic treatment of colon carcinoma, whereas it is widely used off-label for treating ocular neovascular diseases.
In this review, after thorough search, 33 relevant studies conducted in the last 4 years were found. These articles comprised 14 studies about use of bevacizumab alone or in combination with other therapeutic agents to treat exudative AMD, and 19 studies on the use of myopic CNV.
Although bevacizumab is widely used as an anti-VEGF agent for the treatment of exudative AMD, data on its systemic side effects are limited because of studies' short follow-up periods, absence of appropriate controls, limitation in reporting outcomes, and lack of controlled clinical trials in Phase III. Some safety studies demonstrated no difference between bevacizumab and ranibizumab in occurrence of heart attacks or stroke. Conducting proper randomized clinical trials with long-term follow-up is crucial to make sure about efficacy and safety of bevacizumab.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the leading cause of blindness in the elderly, is a complex disease that results from multiple genetic and environmental factors. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that post-transcriptionally regulate target mRNAs and are frequently implicated in human diseases. Here, we investigated the association of genetic variants in miRNAs and miRNA-binding sites within gene 3'-untranslated regions (3'UTRs) with AMD using data from the largest AMD genome-wide association study. First, we identified three variants in miRNAs significantly associated with AMD. These include rs2168518:G>A in the miR-4513 seed sequence, rs41292412:C>T in pre-miR-122/miR-3591, and rs4351242:C>T in the terminal-loop of pre-miR-3135b. We demonstrated that these variants reduce expression levels of the mature miRNAs in vitro and pointed the target genes that may mediate downstream effects of these miRNAs in AMD. Second, we identified 54 variants (in 31 genes) in miRNA-binding sites associated with AMD. Based on stringent prioritization criteria, we highlighted the variants that are more likely to have an impact on the miRNA-target interactions. Further, we selected rs4151672:C>T within the CFB 3'UTR and experimentally showed that while miR-210-5p downregulates expression of CFB, the variant decreases miR-210-5p-mediated repression of CFB. Together, our findings support the notion that miRNAs may play a role in AMD.
The pathomechanisms that lead to age-related macular degeneration (AMD) are only partially understood. The NLRP3 inflammasome has been shown to be activated in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in eyes with AMD. However, it is not known whether inflammasome activation is a cause or consequence of pathologic changes in AMD. A roadblock to defining the role of inflammasome activation and pathways that regulate it for AMD has been the lack of a mouse model that forms AMD-like pathologies in an age-dependent manner in which the role of the inflammasome can be investigated using genetic studies. We have recently identified such a mouse model, in which increased VEGF-A levels result in early degenerative changes of the RPE, followed by cardinal features of both nonexudative and neovascular AMD. Importantly, higher VEGF-A levels lead to increased oxidative damage and a sub-retinal inflammatory infiltrate that are associated with NLRP3 inflammasome activation in the RPE. Targeting the NLRP3 inflammasome inhibited AMD-like pathologies in these mice. These findings suggest that inhibiting the NLRP3 inflammasome or pathways that regulate it may provide novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of both forms of AMD. 
To evaluate the association between use of antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs and retinal or subretinal hemorrhage in participants with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in the Comparison of AMD Treatments Trials (CATT).
Cohort study within CATT.
Participants in CATT with untreated active neovascular AMD (n = 1185).
Participants were interviewed for use of antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs. Trained readers evaluated photographs for the presence and size of retinal or subretinal hemorrhage at baseline and years 1 and 2. Associations between use of antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs and hemorrhage were evaluated among all participants and by baseline hypertension status using multivariate logistic regression models.
Odds ratio for association with antiplatelet or anticoagulant use.
Among 1165 participants with gradable photographs, 724 (62.1%) had retinal or subretinal hemorrhage at baseline; 84.4% of hemorrhages were 1 disc area (DA) or less, 8.1% were 1 to 2 DA, and 7.5% were more than 2 DA. At baseline, 608 participants (52.2%) used antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs, including 514 participants (44.1%) using antiplatelets only, 77 (6.6%) using anticoagulants only, and 17 (1.5%) using both. Hemorrhage was present in 64.5% of antiplatelet or anticoagulant users and in 59.6% of nonusers (P = 0.09; adjusted odds ratio [OR], 1.18; 95% confidence interval, 0.91-1.51; P = 0.21). Neither presence nor size of baseline hemorrhage was associated with the type, dose, or duration of antiplatelet or anticoagulant use. Forty-four of 1078 participants (4.08%) had retinal or subretinal hemorrhage detected on 1- or 2-year photographs; these hemorrhages were not associated with antiplatelet or anticoagulant use at baseline (P = 0.28) or during follow-up (P = 0.64). Among participants with hypertension (n = 807), antiplatelet or anticoagulant use was associated with a higher rate of hemorrhage at baseline (66.8% vs. 56.4%; adjusted OR, 1.48; P = 0.01), but not size of retinal or subretinal hemorrhage (P = 0.41).
Most retinal or subretinal hemorrhages in eyes enrolled in CATT were less than 1 DA. Among all CATT participants, antiplatelet or anticoagulant use was not associated significantly with hemorrhage, but it was associated significantly with hemorrhage in participants with hypertension.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) related to adverse vascular changes is the most frequent cause of irreversible visual impairment in the elderly. Elevated plasma concentrations of serum homocysteine have been shown to increase the risk of vascular disease.
To assess the relationship between plasma homocysteine level and age related macular degeneration.
A case control study was conducted in a tertiary eye care hospital with 32 diagnosed AMD patients. The patients were compared for plasma homocysteine levels with a control group of 32 patients without AMD. A 1.5 ml of fasting venous blood sample was obtained from each participant. Plasma homocysteine level was measured by high performance liquid chromatography. The main outcome measure was hyperhomocysteinemia, defined as a plasma homocysteine level above 15 μmol/l.
Hyperhomocysteinemia was found in 10 blood samples (83.3 %) of patients in the wet AMD group, in 16 (80 %) blood samples in the dry AMD group, and in 12 blood samples (37%) of controls. The mean ± SD homocysteine level in the AMD group was 16.86 ± 3.52 μmol/L, while in the non-AMD control group it was 14.53 ± 4.08 μmol/L. This difference was statistically significant (p-value = 0.0186). In the individual analysis, it was also found out that the homocysteine level differed significantly between cases and controls in only the wet variety of AMD.
Hyperhomocysteinemia was significantly associated with the wet AMD variety but not with the dry AMD. Thus, homocysteine by oxidative stress and vascular dysfunction can be an important risk factor in the pathogenesis of AMD.
To evaluate the incidence of intermediate-stage age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Cohort study.
Patients enrolled in the Longitudinal Study of the Ocular Complications of AIDS (LSOCA) underwent 5- and 10-year follow-up retinal photographs. Intermediate-stage AMD (AREDS stage 3) was determined from these photographs by graders at a centralized Reading Center, using the Age-Related Eye Disease Study-2 grading system. The incidence of AMD in LSOCA was compared with that in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA), a Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-uninfected cohort, which used a similar photographic methodology.
The incidence of AMD in LSOCA was 0.65/100 person-years (PY). In a multivariate analysis the only significant risk factor for AMD in LSOCA was smoking; the relative risk vs never-smokers was 3.4 for former smokers (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.3, 9.5; P = .02) and 3.3 for current smokers (95% CI 1.1, 9.7; P = .03). Compared with the MESA cohort, the race/ethnicity- and sex-adjusted risk of AMD in LSOCA was 1.75 (95% CI 1.16, 2.64; P = .008), despite the fact that the mean age of the MESA cohort was 17 years greater than the LSOCA cohort (61 ± 9 years vs 44 ± 8 years).
Patients with AIDS have a 1.75-fold increased race- and sex-adjusted incidence of intermediate-stage AMD compared with that found in an HIV-uninfected cohort. This increased incidence is consistent with the increased incidence of other age-related diseases in antiretroviral-treated, immune-restored, HIV-infected persons when compared with HIV-uninfected persons.
Current therapy to slow disease progression in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) entails regular intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) injections, often indefinitely. Little is known about the burden imposed on patients by this repetitive treatment schedule and how this can be best managed. The aim of this study was to explore the psychosocial impact of repeated intravitreal injections on patients with neovascular AMD. Forty patients (16 males, 24 females) with neovascular AMD undergoing anti-VEGF treatment were recruited using purposive sampling from a private ophthalmology practice and public hospital in Melbourne. Patients were surveyed using the Macular Disease Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire (MacTSQ; Bradley, Health Psychology Research Unit, Surrey, England) and underwent semi-structured, one-on-one interviews. Interview topics were: treatment burden and satisfaction; tolerability; barriers to adherence; treatment motivation; and patient education. Interviews were audio recorded and thematic analysis performed using NVivo 10 (QSR International, Doncaster, Australia). Patients recognised the importance of treatment to preserve eyesight, yet experienced significant psychosocial and practical burden from the treatment schedule. Important issues included treatment-related anxiety, financial considerations and transport burden placed on relatives or carers. Many patients were restricted to sedentary activities post-injection owing to treatment side effects. Patients prioritised treatment, often sacrificing family, travel and social commitments owing to a fear of losing eyesight if treatment was not received. Whilst anti-VEGF injections represent the current mainstay of treatment for neovascular AMD, the ongoing treatment protocol imposes significant burden on patients. An understanding of the factors that contribute to the burden of treatment may help inform strategies to lessen its impact and assist patients to better manage the challenges of treatment.
To summarize recommendations for the use of intravitreal aflibercept with a treat-and-extend regimen to manage neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) in the Asia-Pacific region. Although anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapies have improved the quality of life of patients with nAMD, a leading cause of blindness and visual impairment, the high treatment frequency recommended by current guidelines places a significant burden on patients and healthcare providers.
Recommended guidelines from a consensus panel.
An expert panel formed a consensus on recommendations for use of intravitreal aflibercept as treatment of nAMD in the Asia-Pacific region.
After 3 initial monthly doses, treatment interval could be extended by 4-week increments, to a maximum of 12 weeks, in patients with inactive disease. Conversely, in active disease, treatment intervals should be shortened, by 4 weeks, or to 4 weeks in cases of severe recurrence. Treatment could be ceased in patients with stable disease activity after 12 months of treatment at 12-week intervals, as a means to prevent over treatent and lifelong injections.
These recommendations could potentially minimize the number of treatments while maintaining efficacy and improve compliance by reducing the number of clinic visits compared with existing recommendations.
We performed a genome-wide association study on 377 cases of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and 1074 controls to determine the association of previously reported genetic variants associated with neovascular AMD in the Thai population. All patients were of Thai ancestry. We confirmed the association of age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 (ARMS2) rs10490924 (P=7.38 × 10<sup>-17</sup>), HTRA1 rs11200638 (P=5.47 × 10<sup>-17</sup>) and complement factor H gene (CFH) rs800292 (P=2.53 × 10<sup>-8</sup>) with neovascular AMD, all loci passing the genome-wide significance level (P<5.22 × 10<sup>-8</sup>). We also found association of the previously reported CFH rs10737680 (P=1.76 × 10<sup>-6</sup>) locus in the discovery sample. Two loci not previously reported to be associated with neovascular AMD were selected for replication in 222 cases and 623 controls. The loci included LINCO1317 rs6733379 and rs2384550 on chromosome 12. LINCO1317 rs6733379 (P=3.85 × 10<sup>-2</sup>) remained significantly associated with neovascular AMD after replication. In conclusion, we confirm that ARMS2, HTRA1 and CFH variants are associated with neovascular AMD in the Thai population. Findings from this study also suggest that variants contributing to the susceptibility of neovascular AMD in the Thai population are mostly similar to other Asians with additional local genetic risks that may specifically be identified in Thai population.
Previous models of disease in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) were incomplete in that they did not encompass subretinal drusenoid deposits (pseudodrusen), subtypes of neovascularization, and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy. In addition, Type 3 neovascularization starts in the retina and may not necessarily involve the choroid. As such, the term choroidal neovascularization is not appropriate for these eyes. The new aspects in the AMD construct are to include specific lipoprotein extracellular accumulations, namely drusen and subretinal drusenoid deposits, as early AMD. The deposition of specific types of deposit seems to be highly correlated with choroidal thickness and topographical location in the macula. Late AMD includes macular neovascularization or atrophy. The particular type of extracellular deposit is predictive of the future course of the patient. For example, eyes with subretinal drusenoid deposits have a propensity to develop outer retinal atrophy, complete outer retinal and retinal pigment epithelial atrophy, or Type 3 neovascularization as specific forms of late AMD. Given Type 3 neovascularization may never involve the choroid, the term macular neovascularization is suggested for the entire spectrum of neovascular disease in AMD. In contrast to older classification systems, the proposed system encompasses the relevant presentations of disease and more precisely predicts the future course of the patient. In doing so, the concept was developed that there may be genetic risk alleles, which are not necessarily the same alleles that influence disease expression.
To evaluate the factors affecting visual and anatomical outcomes and the number of intravitreal bevacizumab injections required in the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration using a treat-and-extend regimen.
Retrospective consecutive case series. The charts of subjects treated with intravitreal bevacizumab for neovascular age-related macular degeneration using a treat-and-extend regimen over a 12-month period were reviewed. The key variables explored were patient age, phakic status, posterior vitreous detachment status, baseline best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), baseline central macular thickness (CMT), and type of chorodial neovascularization. The primary outcome measures were improvement in BCVA of 3 logMAR lines or more, maintenance of BCVA within 3 logMAR lines of baseline, number of intravitreal injections delivered over a 12-month period, and final CMT on optical coherence tomography.
A total of 230 eyes met the criteria. Mean presenting BCVA was Snellen 20/55 (0.44 logMAR) and mean final BCVA was Snellen 20/44 (0.35 logMAR) (P < 0.001). A total of 23.5% (95% confidence interval [CI], 18.5-29.4%) of the subjects demonstrated an improvement in BCVA of 3 or more logMAR lines, whereas 96.5% (95% CI, 93.3-98.2%) of the subjects lost fewer than 3 logMAR lines. Mean CMT on optical coherence tomography changed from a baseline average of 373.1 μm (95%CI, 360.3-386.1 μm) to a final average of 305.5 μm (95% CI, 290.0-316.0 μm). The average number of injections during the 12-month period was 9.2 (95% CI, 9.0-9.4). Posterior vitreous detachment was associated with fewer injections on univariate and multivariate analysis (8.7 injections in the posterior vitreous detachment group versus 9.8 in the non-posterior vitreous detachment group, P < 0.001). Patients with poorer presenting BCVA and greater baseline CMTs were more likely to demonstrate a 3 or more logMAR line improvement in BCVA. Thinner final CMTs were independently associated with thinner presenting CMTs and fewer injections.
Favorable visual and anatomical outcomes may be achieved with intravitreal bevacizumab in the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration using a treat-and-extend regimen. Our study suggests that posterior vitreous detachment may play a role in the efficacy of intravitreal bevacizumab during the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Variation in the <i>ABCA4</i> gene is causal for, or associated with, a wide range of phenotypes from early onset Mendelian retinal dystrophies to late-onset complex disorders such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Despite substantial progress in determining the causal genetic variation, even complete sequencing of the entire open reading frame and splice sites of <i>ABCA4</i> identifies biallelic mutations in only 60%-70% of cases; 20%-25% remain with one mutation and no mutations are found in 10%-15% of cases with clinically confirmed ABCA4 disease. This study was designed to identify missing causal variants specifically in monoallelic cases of ABCA4 disease.
Direct sequencing and analysis were performed in a large familial ABCA4 disease cohort of predominately European descent (n=643). Patient phenotypes were assessed from clinical and retinal imaging data.
We determined that a hypomorphic <i>ABCA4</i> variant c.5603A>T (p.Asn1868Ile), previously considered benign due to high minor allele frequency (MAF) (~7%) in the general population, accounts for 10% of the disease, >50% of the missing causal alleles in monoallelic cases, ~80% of late-onset cases and distinguishes ABCA4 disease from AMD. It results in a distinct clinical phenotype characterised by late-onset of symptoms (4th decade) and foveal sparing (85%). Intragenic modifying effects involving this variant and another, c.2588G>C (p.Gly863Ala) allele, were also identified.
These findings substantiate the causality of frequent missense variants and their phenotypic outcomes as a significant contribution to ABCA4 disease, particularly the late-onset phenotype, and its clinical variation. They also suggest a significant revision of diagnostic screening and assessment of <i>ABCA4</i> variation in aetiology of retinal diseases.
Smoking has been identified as a major modifiable risk factor for age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Smoking deception or failing to self-report as a smoker is a recognized concern among studies of smoking-related disease. To date, no studies have evaluated the rates of smoking deception in macular degeneration.
Data from the 2005 to 2008 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey were used to produce estimates of smoking deception among three ethnic groups within the US population. Comparisons of self-reported rates of cigarette use, any nicotine product use, and serum cotinine levels were used to produce estimates of potential smoking deception among adults older than 40 years with any-level macular degeneration and those at risk of late-stage disease.
Any-level AMD was found to be present in 6.7% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 5.6% to 7.8%) of this cohort. Excluding those with late AMD, 9.7% (95% CI = 8.3% to 11.0%) were at risk of developing late-stage disease. Among individuals with any level of macular degeneration, 5.4% (95% CI = 2.1% to 8.6%) were potential smoking deceivers. A similar rate was seen among those at risk of late-stage disease at 5.0% (95% CI = 2.3% to 7.6%).
The rate of possible smoking deception seems higher for macular degeneration and those at risk of late-stage AMD than is generally reported in the US population. While the deception rate is low at the individual level, as many as 450,000 adults in the US population at risk of late-stage AMD may misclassify their smoking status.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the early effects of soft drusen on retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), ellipsoid zone (EZ, photoreceptor inner segment/outer segment junction), and external limiting membrane (ELM) reflectivities using optical coherence tomography (OCT) image analysis. This retrospective comparative study comprised 47 patients with non-neovascular AMD (with intact RPE, EZ, and ELM bands on OCT) and 45 age- and sex-matched healthy controls with normal OCT. A single masked physician performed OCT image analysis using a medical image processing software. Reflectivities of RPE, EZ, and ELM; number of drusen; vertical and horizontal diameters of the largest druse; druse reflectivity; foveal involvement by a druse; and presence of ≥1 large druse (n) were evaluated based on the macular OCT scan. Forty-seven right eyes of 47 patients with non-neovascular AMD and 45 right eyes of 45 healthy subjects were recruited. In the non-neovascular AMD group, absolute EZ and RPE reflectivities were significantly lower compared to those of the control eyes (P < 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). Comparing relative reflectivity values, only relative EZ reflectivity (EZ/ELM reflectivity) remained to show a significant difference between the groups (P < 0.001). Correlation analyses revealed no significant relation between the reflectivity values and drusen characteristics (P > 0.05). In eyes with non-neovascular AMD, decreased RPE (only absolute) and EZ (both absolute and relative) reflectivities prior to the disruption of these layers on OCT might indicate early photoreceptor damage. However, lower reflectivity values appear to be independent of the drusen characteristics.
Age-related macular degeneration is the leading cause of central blindness in elderly population of the western world. The pathogenesis of this disease, likely multifactorial, is not well known, although a number of theories have been put forward, including oxidative stress, genetic interactions, hemodynamic imbalance, immune and inflammatory processes. The understanding of age-related macular degeneration pathogenesis will give rise to new approaches in prevention and treatment of the early and late stages of both atrophic and neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is one of the leading causes of blindness in the US affecting millions yearly. It is characterized by intraocular neovascularization, inflammation and retinal damage which can be ameliorated through intraocular injections of glucocorticoids. However, the complications that arise from repetitive injections as well as the difficulty posed by targeting the posterior segment of the eye make this interesting territory for the development of novel drug delivery systems (DDS). In the present study, we described the development of a DDS composed of triamcinolone acetonide-encapsulated PEGylated PLGA nanoparticles (NP) incorporated into PLGA-PEG-PLGA thermoreversible gel and its use against VEGF expression characteristic of AMD. We found that the NP with mean size of 208 ± 1.0 nm showed uniform size distribution and exhibited sustained release of the drug. We also demonstrated that the polymer can be injected as a solution and transition to a gel phase based on the biological temperature of the eye. Additionally, the proposed DDS was non-cytotoxic to ARPE-19 cells and significantly reduced VEGF expression by 43.5 ± 3.9% as compared to a 1.53 ± 11.1% reduction with triamcinolone. These results suggest the proposed DDS will contribute to the development of novel therapeutic strategies for AMD. 
Millions of individuals older than 50-years suffer from age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Associated with this multifactorial disease are polymorphisms of complement factor genes and a main environmental risk factor-oxidative stress. Until now the linkage between these risk factors for AMD has not been fully understood. Recent studies, integrating results on oxidative stress, complement activation, epidemiology and ocular pathology suggested the following sequence in AMD-etiology: initially, chronic oxidative stress results in modification of proteins and lipids in the posterior of the eye; these tissue alterations trigger chronic inflammation, involving the complement system; and finally, invasive immune cells facilitate pathology in the retina. Here, we summarize the results for animal studies which aim to elucidate this molecular interplay of oxidative events and tissue-specific complement activation in the eye. 
To investigate thiol/disulfide status using a novel automated assay in patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) compared to age-matched healthy controls.
A total of 64 AMD patients [51 (79%) non-exudative, 13 (21%) exudative AMD] and 21 age-matched healthy control subjects were enrolled in this study. Plasma total thiol, native thiol, disulfide levels were measured and native thiol/disulfide ratio (TDR) was calculated using a novel spectrophotometric assay.
Patients with AMD had significantly lower levels of total thiol (434.8 ± 7.0 μmol/L vs. 472.2 ± 7.9 μmol/L, p < 0.001), native thiol (393.6 ± 6.5 μmol/L vs. 437.5 ± 7.1 μmol/L, p = 0.004) compared to healthy controls. However, plasma disulfide levels were higher in AMD patients (20.6 ± 0.9 μmol/L vs. 17.3 ± 1.3 μmol/L, p = 0.113) compared to healthy controls. The TDR was not statistically different between the early AMD group and healthy controls (24.2 ± 2.3 vs. 29.5 ± 3.1, p = 0.345). However, intermediate and advanced stage AMD groups had significantly lower levels of TDR compared to healthy controls (21.6 ± 2.6 vs. 29.5 ± 3.1, p = 0.023 and 20.3 ± 1.2 vs. 29.5 ± 3.1, p = 0.005, respectively). Native TDR was significantly lower in patients with exudative and non-exudative AMD (19.9 ± 2.3 vs. 29.5 ± 3.1, p = 0.024 and 21.8 ± 1.14 vs. 29.47 ± 3.1 respectively, p = 0.011).
A greater extent of thiol consumption occurred in AMD patients compared to age-matched healthy controls. However, despite the similar levels of total thiol levels between several grades of AMD, the plasma native TDR value was decreased in accordance with the severity of the disease, which reflected the disease grade better.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the quality of life in persons affected by age-related macular degeneration.
The study was performed in the Clinic of Ophthalmology, Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences. A total of 140 patients completed the Visual Functioning Questionnaire and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) during this prospective study. The patients were divided into two groups: patients with age-related macular degeneration (70 patients) and control patients (70 patients).
There was a significant difference in the quality of life between groups (P<0.0001). Analyzing patients with age-related macular degeneration within the group (patients with monocular or binocular disorders), significant differences in near vision (P=0.003), far vision (P=0.04), color vision (P=0.01), and social functioning (P=0.02) were observed. Mental health (r=0.326, P=0.02), dependency (r=0.340, P=0.02), and role difficulties (r=0.355, P=0.01) were found to be significantly associated with general vision in the age-related macular degeneration group.
Age-related macular degeneration appeared to have a great impact on the quality of life. General vision impairment caused by age-related macular degeneration affects patient's mental health, dependency, and role difficulties.
To determine the age- and sex-specific prevalence of early and late age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in two Portuguese population-based samples and to identify its risk factors.
A population of 6023 adults aged ≥55 years was recruited from two Portuguese primary healthcare units in the central region of Portugal - one from a coastal (n = 3000) and another from an inland town (n = 3023).
Cross-sectional population-based study. Participants were enrolled in the two locations between August 2009 and October 2013. Responders underwent standardized interviews and ophthalmologic examination, including digital fundus imaging. All fundus photographs were graded according to an International Classification and Grading System. The main outcome measures consisted of age- and sex-adjusted prevalence of early and late AMD. Potential epidemiologic risk factors were also evaluated using logistic regression analysis.
Of the 6023 subjects enrolled, 5996 had gradable fundus images and were included in the analysis. The crude prevalence of early and late AMD was 6.99 and 0.67%, respectively, for the coastal town and 15.39 and 1.29% for the inland town. Age- and sex-adjusted prevalence of any AMD for the Portuguese population was 12.48% (95% CI: 11.61-13.33) with late AMD accounting for 1.16% (95% CI: 0.85-1.46). Neovascular AMD (NV-AMD) and geographic atrophy (GA) accounted for 0.55% (95% CI: 0.36-0.75) and 0.61% (95% CI: 0.37-0.84) of individuals, respectively. After adjusting for possible confounding factors, prevalence of early and late AMD increased with increasing age (OR = 1.35; 95% CI: 1.23-1.49 for early and OR = 3.01; 95% CI: 2.22-4.08 for late AMD, per each decade of age increase, p < 0.001). After adjustment for age, sex, family history, smoking history, hypertension, diabetes and BMI, subjects from the inland town presented a significantly higher OR of early and late AMD than subjects from the coastal town (OR = 2.57, 95% CI: 2.12-3.12, p < 0.001 for early and OR = 2.06, 95% CI: 1.07-3.95, p = 0.029 for late AMD).
The prevalence of early and late AMD in this Portuguese population was similar to other large-scale population-based cohorts. After controlling for confounders, age and study site of inclusion were significant independent predictors for both early and late forms of the disease. Further analysis will be needed to completely unravel the underlying reasons for this difference regarding geographic location.
To compare optical coherence tomography (OCT) and histology of outer retinal tubulation (ORT) secondary to advanced age-related macular degeneration in patients and in postmortem specimens, with particular attention to the basis of the hyperreflective border of ORT.
A private referral practice (imaging) and an academic research laboratory (histology) collaborated on two retrospective case series. High-resolution OCT raster scans of 43 eyes (34 patients) manifesting ORT secondary to advanced age-related macular degeneration were compared to high-resolution histologic sections through the fovea and superior perifovea of donor eyes (13 atrophic age-related macular degeneration and 40 neovascular age-related macular degeneration) preserved ≤4 hours after death.
Outer retinal tubulation seen on OCT correlated with histologic findings of tubular structures consisted largely of cones lacking outer segments and lacking inner segments. Four phases of cone degeneration were histologically distinguishable in ORT lumenal walls, nascent, mature, degenerate, and end stage (inner segments and outer segments, inner segments only, no inner segments, and no photoreceptors and only Müller cells forming external limiting membrane, respectively). Mitochondria, which are normally long and bundled within inner segment ellipsoids, were small and scattered within shrunken inner segments and cell bodies of surviving cones. A lumenal border was delimited by an external limiting membrane. Outer retinal tubulation observed in closed and open configurations was distinguishable from cysts and photoreceptor islands on both OCT and histology. Hyperreflective lumenal material seen on OCT represents trapped retinal pigment epithelium and nonretinal pigment epithelium cells.
The defining OCT features of ORT are location in the outer nuclear layer, a hyperreflective band differentiating it from cysts, and retinal pigment epithelium that is either dysmorphic or absent. Histologic and OCT findings of outer retinal tubulation corresponded in regard to composition, location, shape, and stages of formation. The reflectivity of ORT lumenal walls on OCT apparently does not require an outer segment or an inner/outer segment junction, indicating an independent reflectivity source, possibly mitochondria, in the inner segments.
To investigate the impact of misclassification of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) on the baseline intensity and estimated effects of age, sex, and the Y402H variant in the complement factor H (CFH) gene on incidence, progression, and regression of AMD.
The Beaver Dam Eye Study, a longitudinal population-based study of age-related eye diseases conducted in the city and township of Beaver Dam, Wisconsin, performed examinations every 5 years during a 20-year period (1988-1990 through 2008-2010). Study participants (N = 4379) aged 43 to 86 years at the baseline examination had retinal photographs taken at baseline and up to four subsequent examinations. Multistate models with misclassification in continuous time were used to model the effects of age, sex, and CFH genotype on incidence, progression, and regression of AMD and mortality.
After accounting for AMD misclassification, the occurrence of any AMD regression was rare (1%-4%), while it was relatively common (14%-21%) in models that do not account for misclassification. Failure to account for misclassification attenuated estimated age effects on incidence and progression to moderately severe early AMD and attenuated estimated CFH effects on incidence and progressions to moderately severe and severe early AMD.
Apparent regression of AMD can largely, if not completely, be explained by misclassification. Estimated age effects on incidence and progression to moderately severe early AMD and estimated CFH effects on incidence and progressions to moderately severe and severe early AMD were attenuated in multistate models that did not account for misclassification.
To investigate alterations of superficial and deep retinal vascular densities, as well as of choroidal thickness, in patients affected by adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy (AOFVD).
A total of 22 eyes (15 patients) affected by AOFVD were recruited in the study. Furthermore, 20 eyes of 20 healthy subjects and 20 eyes of 18 patients affected by intermediate dry age-related macular degeneration (AMD) were enrolled. All patients underwent a complete ophthalmologic examination, including optical coherence tomography angiography. Outcome measures were superficial vessel density, deep vessel density, and choroidal thickness.
Parafoveal superficial vessel density was increased in patients with AOFVD compared with the AMD group (50.6 ± 4.3% and 46.3 ± 4.3%, respectively, P = 0.016). Parafoveal deep vessel density was 57.9 ± 6.4% in patients with AOFVD, 52.2 ± 3.8% in patients with AMD, and 52.7 ± 6.0% in healthy controls (P = 0.006 and P = 0.035, respectively, after comparison with the AOFVD group).
We demonstrated that both superficial and deep vessel densities were significantly increased in patients with AOFVD, after the comparison with intermediate patients with AMD. These findings suggest that the pathogenic mechanisms in AOFVD are different from those in AMD and that optical coherence tomography angiography could be useful in differentiate early stages of these two diseases.
Our purpose was to use deep learning for the automated detection of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT).
A total of 1112 cross-section SD-OCT images of patients with exudative AMD and a healthy control group were used for this study. In the first step, an open-source multi-layer deep convolutional neural network (DCNN), which was pretrained with 1.2 million images from ImageNet, was trained and validated with 1012 cross-section SD-OCT scans (AMD: 701; healthy: 311). During this procedure training accuracy, validation accuracy and cross-entropy were computed. The open-source deep learning framework TensorFlow™ (Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA) was used to accelerate the deep learning process. In the last step, a created DCNN classifier, using the information of the above mentioned deep learning process, was tested in detecting 100 untrained cross-section SD-OCT images (AMD: 50; healthy: 50). Therefore, an AMD testing score was computed: 0.98 or higher was presumed for AMD.
After an iteration of 500 training steps, the training accuracy and validation accuracies were 100%, and the cross-entropy was 0.005. The average AMD scores were 0.997 ± 0.003 in the AMD testing group and 0.9203 ± 0.085 in the healthy comparison group. The difference between the two groups was highly significant (p < 0.001).
With a deep learning-based approach using TensorFlow™, it is possible to detect AMD in SD-OCT with high sensitivity and specificity. With more image data, an expansion of this classifier for other macular diseases or further details in AMD is possible, suggesting an application for this model as a support in clinical decisions. Another possible future application would involve the individual prediction of the progress and success of therapy for different diseases by automatically detecting hidden image information.
To study the relation between the interval from diagnosis to initiation of intravitreal injection therapy and visual outcome in neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) and to report changes over time in fellow-eye status.
Retrospective chart review. The study included 1185 eyes in 1099 patients who began vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor treatment for nAMD during four separate periods in 2007, 2009, 2011 and 2012 using a fixed loading-dose regimen of three ranibizumab injections.
Mean best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at presentation remained within the range 0.23-0.24 Snellen and the median patient age within 79-80 years, whereas BCVA at first visit after the third injection increased from 0.24 to 0.31 (p < 0.0001) in concert with a shift in preferred practice from separate-day injection to same-day injection. This led to a reduction in the median time to treatment from 16 days to 1 day. The proportion of patients with fellow-eye BCVA 0.05 or worse at presentation with newly diagnosed wet AMD in the incident eye decreased from 38% to 22% (p < 0.0018). The proportion of bilaterally treated patients increased during the study period.
In this study, 2-week-earlier injection was associated with the equivalent of a 5-Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study letter-gain in mean visual acuity at 3 months after presentation. The difference is larger than expected from the 2-week-longer duration of disease at the study end-point. The study supports that early diagnosis and treatment of nAMD is of value for functional outcomes.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the worldwide leading cause of blindness among the elderly, especially in developed countries. The possible association between apolipoprotein E (ApoE) polymorphism (ε2, ε3, ε4) and AMD has been extensively investigated with conflicting results, especially when specifying different clinical phenotypes of AMD. Herein, we conducted a meta-analysis by integrating several recent large-sample studies to verify the effect of ApoE polymorphisms on AMD subtypes.
The retrieve for targeted literature was conducted based on the PubMed, Embase, Cochrane library, and Web of Science. Summary odds ratio (OR) and its 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used for estimation of risk. The p-value was adjusted due to the multiple comparison.
A total of 12 studies included in the final summary analysis, including 13842 cases and 38647 controls. ApoE ε4 carrier was inversely associated with early stage AMD (OR = 0.889, 95% CI = 0.82-0.97), geographic atrophy (OR = 0.594, 95% CI = 0.43-0.83) and neovascular AMD (OR = 0.670, 95% CI = 0.58-0.76). Stratification analysis by ethnicity revealed that the ApoE ε4 carriers was associated with neovascular AMD in both Caucasians (OR = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.47-0.83) and East Asians (OR = 0.68, 95% CI = 0.58-0.79). A significant association of ApoE ε2 carriers was only found with early AMD in Black and East Asian population, however small samples and limited studies restrict its generalization.
Our meta-analysis revealed a significantly protective role of ε4 on each subtypes of AMD, but no supportive evidence of the association of ε2 with AMD. Thus, further studies with larger samples are needed to understand the precise role of ε2 on AMD susceptibility.
To evaluate the changes of the photoreceptor layer (PRL) thickness with spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) and the retinal function by mfERG, as well as the correlation of morphology and function parameters in subjects with early and intermediate age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Subjects with clinical diagnosis of early or intermediate AMD and age-matched healthy subjects were recruited prospectively in this study. Color fundus photography, SD-OCT, and mfERG were conducted. Retinal photoreceptor thickness was measured, and first-order kernel responses were recorded. The differences between AMD group and control group were compared, and the correlations between macular photoreceptor thickness and the mfERG were analyzed.
PRL thickness (μm) in four areas including foveola and 0.5, 1.5, and 3 mm away from foveola was 192.48 ± 17.37, 163.73 ± 12.95, 130.93 ± 9.20, and 108.78 ± 7.81, respectively, in normal eyes, whereas in AMD group, they were 158.61 ± 45.25, 138.91 ± 20.92, 118.91 ± 12.85, and 95.00 ± 9.64, respectively (P < 0.001). The mean amplitude response densities of AMD patients decreased significantly compared to the control group in ring 1-6 (P < 0.001). The mean mfERG N1 and P1 latency of AMD patients prolonged compared to the control group, except the ring 1 (P = 0.588 and P = 0.084). The macular PRL thickness was significantly associated with the mfERGN1 and P1 amplitude density in ring 1-4 (r = 0.338-0.533, P < 0.01).
PRL thickness decreases are in accordance with the deterioration of retinal electrophysiological activity. The retinal PRL thickness is important parameter to assess of early and intermediate AMD severity.
To evaluate the efficiency of gas-assisted vitreomacular adhesion (VMA) release combined with intravitreal ranibizumab injections for exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD) patients.
This prospective, interventional case series included a total of 23 eyes of 22 patients. The eyes were treated with intravitreal injection of 0.3 mL of perfluoropropane (C3F8) gas and concomitant intravitreal ranibizumab injection to stimulate VMA release. After three initial loading injections, additional intravitreal ranibizumab injections were performed pro re nata. Over a 12-month period, monthly examinations were performed for best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA, logMAR; logarithm of the minimum angle resolution), optical coherence tomography, and dilated fundus examinations.
After gas injection, 22 eyes (95.7 %) showed complete VMA release at 1 week. Complete VMA was achieved in all eyes at 2 months after VMA release, without serious ocular adverse events except one patient who developed a retinal tear. Mean BCVA was 0.61 ± 0.37 logMAR (20/81 Snellen equivalents) at baseline and 0.46 ± 0.30 logMAR (20/57 Snellen equivalents) at 12 months (P = 0.135). Mean central macular thickness was 357.9 ± 128.6 μm at baseline and 245.6 ± 60.0 μm at 12 months (P = 0.188). Mean numbers of intravitreal ranibizumab injections were 4.8 ± 2.4 times during 12 months (4 to 8 injections).
Gas-assisted VMA release can be used as an efficient alternative for exudative AMD patients with obvious VMA.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of irreversible blindness among the elderly population globally. Currently, knowledge of the epidemiology of AMD in Australia remains scarce because of a paucity of recent population-based data.
To examine the prevalence of AMD in Australia.
In this population-based, cross-sectional survey performed from March 11, 2015, to April 18, 2016, a sample of 3098 nonindigenous Australians 50 years and older and 1738 indigenous Australians 40 years and older from 30 geographic areas across Australia were examined.
Any AMD, early AMD, intermediate AMD, and late AMD graded according to the Beckman clinical classification system.
A total of 4836 individuals were examined, including 3098 nonindigenous Australian (64.1%; 58.9% female vs 41.1% male; age range, 40-92 years; mean [SD] age, 55.0 [10.0] years) and 1738 indigenous Australians (35.9%; 53.6% female vs 46.4% male; age range, 50-98 years; mean [SD] age, 66.6 [9.7] years). A total of 4589 (94.9%, 2946 nonindigenous and 1643 indigenous) participants had retinal photographs in at least 1 eye that were gradable for AMD. The weighted prevalence of early AMD was 14.8% (95% CI, 11.7%-18.6%) and of intermediate AMD was 10.5% (95% CI, 8.3%-13.1%) among nonindigenous Australians. In indigenous Australians, the weighted prevalence of early AMD was 13.8% (95% CI, 9.7%-19.3%) and of intermediate AMD was 5.7% (96% CI, 4.7%-7.0%). Late AMD was found in 0.96% (95% CI, 0.59%-1.55%) of nonindigenous participants (atrophic, 0.72%; neovascular, 0.24%). The prevalence of late AMD increased to 6.7% in participants 80 years or older and was higher in men (1.4% vs 0.61%, P = .02). Only 3 (0.17% [95% CI, 0.04%-0.63%]) indigenous participants had late (atrophic) AMD. Age-related macular degeneration was attributed as the main cause of vision loss (<6/12 in the better eye) in 23 of 208 nonindigenous Australians (11.1%) and 2 of 183 indigenous Australians (1.1%).
In line with data from other white populations, AMD is a prominent cause of vision loss in the nonindigenous Australian population. An increased provision of low vision rehabilitation services may be required to cope with the projected increase in AMD in Australia.
To investigate the incidence and predictors of macular atrophy during treatment with aflibercept for neovascular age-related macular degeneration in Japanese patients.
This study included patients with treatment-naive subfoveal neovascular age-related macular degeneration treated from December 2012 through January 2015. Patients were treated with bi-monthly aflibercept injections after 3 monthly loading injections for the first year. Diagnosis of retinal pigment epithelial atrophy was made based on color fundus photography, spectral-domain optical coherence tomography, and fundus autofluorescence. Baseline characteristics and morphological features were analyzed for their association with the development of macular atrophy.
This study included 123 eyes that had no baseline macular atrophy and treated with aflibercept injections for 12 months. Thirteen eyes (10.6%) developed new macular atrophy at 12 months. Logistic regression analysis showed that the presence of intraretinal fluid and thinner subfoveal choroidal thickness at baseline were associated with the development of macular atrophy after aflibercept treatment.
Macular atrophy developed in about 10% of eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration during 12 months of treatment with a fixed regimen of aflibercept. Intraretinal fluid and subfoveal choroidal thickness seem to be predictors for development of macular atrophy after anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of blindness and low vision among older adults. Previous research shows a high prevalence of distress and disruption to the lifestyle of family caregivers of persons with late AMD. This supports existing evidence that caregivers are 'hidden patients' at risk of poor health outcomes. There is ample scope for improving the support available to caregivers, and further research should be undertaken into developing services that are tailored to the requirements of family caregivers of persons with AMD. This study aims to implement and evaluate an innovative, multi-modal support service programme that aims to empower family caregivers by improving their coping strategies, enhancing hopeful feelings such as self-efficacy and helping them make the most of available sources of social and financial support.
A randomised controlled trial consisting of 360 caregiver-patient pairs (180 in each of the intervention and wait-list control groups). The intervention group will receive the following: (1) mail-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy designed to improve psychological adjustment and adaptive coping skills; (2) telephone-delivered group counselling sessions allowing caregivers to explore the impacts of caring and share their experiences; and (3) education on available community services/resources, financial benefits and respite services. The cognitive behavioural therapy embedded in this programme is the best evaluated and widely used psychosocial intervention. The primary outcome is a reduction in caregiver burden. Secondary outcomes include improvements in caregiver mental well-being, quality of life, fatigue and self-efficacy. Economic analysis will inform whether this intervention is cost-effective and if it is feasible to roll out this service on a larger scale.
The study was approved by the University of Sydney human research ethics committee. Study findings will be disseminated via presentations at national/international conferences and peer-reviewed journal articles.
The trial registration number is ACTRN12616001461482; pre-results.
Anti-vascular endothelial growth factors have become the mainstay treatment for neovascular age related macular degeneration. Prolonged suppression of vascular endothelial growth factor raises concerns as it may result in harmful effects on retina.
The purpose of this retrospective chart review is to evaluate the 1-year effect of treatment with intravitreal injections of ranibizumab on normal neurosensory retinal tissue of patients with exudative age related macular degeneration using the Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT).
The study included <b>s</b>ixty five eyes of 62 patients (32 male and 30 female; mean age 74.97±8.5 years) with exudative age related macular degeneration treated with intravitreal injections of ranibizumab with a <i>pro re nata</i> treatment regimen over a period of 1 year. The MM5 thickness maps acquired with the Optovue RTVue-100 Fourier-domain OCT at baseline, at 3 months, after the 3 loading doses of ranibizumab, and at the 1 year follow-up visit were used for analysis. Changes of inner and outer retinal thickness in four selected points of normal retina on the MM5 scan were evaluated.
The patients received a mean of 6.4 ± 1.8 (median 6, range 3-11) intravitreal injections of ranibizumab over a period of 12 months. No significant change was observed in inner and outer retinal thickness at pre-selected spots of normal retina during the first year of intravitreal administration of ranibizumab.
One year treatment with ranibizumab on an individualized, according to need dosing regimen does not seem to induce any detectable structural damage in the unaffected, normal retina.
Mitochondrial ferritin (FtMt) is believed to play an antioxidant role via iron regulation, and FtMt gene mutation has been reported in age-related macular degeneration (AMD). However, little is known about FtMt's functions in the retina and any links to AMD. In this study, we observed age-related increase in FtMt and hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) in murine retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). FtMt overexpression in ARPE-19 cells stabilized HIF-1α, and increased the secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor. Conversely, HIF-1α stabilization reduced the protein level of the mature, functional form of FtMt. FtMt-overexpressing ARPE-19 cells exhibited less oxidative phosphorylation but unchanged production of adenosine triphosphate, enhanced mitochondrial fission, and triggered mitophagy in a HIF-1α-dependent manner. These findings suggest that increased FtMt in RPE may be protective via triggering mitophagy but cause wet AMD by inducing neovascularization due to increased vascular endothelial growth factor secretion. However, reduced level of functional FtMt in RPE under hypoxia may allow dry AMD through susceptibility to age-related stress.
To describe risk factors for scar in eyes treated with ranibizumab or bevacizumab for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Prospective cohort study within a randomized clinical trial.
Patients with no scar on color fundus photography (CFP) or fluorescein angiography (FA) at enrollment in the Comparison of Age-related Macular Degeneration Treatments Trials (CATT).
Eyes were assigned to ranibizumab or bevacizumab treatment and to 1 of 3 dosing regimens for 2 years. Masked readers assessed CFP and FA. Baseline demographic characteristics, visual acuity, morphologic features on photography and optical coherence tomography (OCT), and genotypes associated with AMD risk were evaluated as risk factors using adjusted hazard ratios (aHRs) and associated 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Scars were classified as fibrotic with well-demarcated elevated mounds of yellowish white tissue or nonfibrotic with discrete flat areas of hyperpigmentation with varying amounts of central depigmentation.
Scar formation.
Scar developed in 480 of 1059 eyes (45.3%) by 2 years. Baseline characteristics associated with greater risk of scarring were predominantly classic choroidal neovascularization (CNV) (aHR, 3.1; CI, 2.4-3.9) versus occult CNV, blocked fluorescence (aHR, 1.4; CI, 1.1-1.8), foveal retinal thickness >212 μm (aHR, 2.4; CI, 1.7-3.6) versus <120 μm, foveal subretinal tissue complex thickness >275 μm (aHR, 2.4; CI, 1.7-3.6) versus ≤75 μm, foveal subretinal fluid (aHR, 1.5; CI, 1.1-2.0) versus no subretinal fluid, and subretinal hyperreflective material (SHRM) (aHR, 1.7; CI, 1.3-2.3) versus no SHRM. Eyes with elevation of the retinal pigment epithelium had lower risk (aHR, 0.6; CI, 0.5-0.8) versus no elevation. Drug, dosing regimen, and genotype had no statistically significant association with scarring. Fibrotic scars developed in 24.7% of eyes, and nonfibrotic scars developed in 20.6% of eyes. Baseline risk factors for the scar types were similar except that eyes with larger lesion size or visual acuity <20/40 were more likely to develop fibrotic scars.
Approximately half of eyes enrolled in CATT developed scar by 2 years. Eyes with classic neovascularization, a thicker retina, and more fluid or material under the foveal center of the retina are more likely to develop scar.
To evaluate macular morphological parameters measured by spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) as predictive factors of visual outcome in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD) treated with ranibizumab.
A retrospective study was conducted on 47 patients diagnosed with exudative AMD and treated with intravitreal ranibizumab for twelve months. Central retinal thickness (CRT), extension and thickness of modifications secondary to neovascular process, and status of the bands corresponding to the external limiting membrane (ELM) and to the ellipsoid region of the photoreceptors (ISe) were evaluated by means of SD-OCT. The relationship between these variables and visual acuity was analyzed by statistical methods.
At the time of the diagnosis, preservation of ELM and ISe bands, and CRT were correlated with initial visual acuity. Twelve months later, CRT and visual acuity were independent parameters. Bivariate relationship analysis showed a correlation between final visual acuity and the following parameters: initial CRT, initial ISe and ELM status, and ISe and ELM integrity after loading dose. Multiple regression analysis indicated that initial visual acuity and ISe band status after loading dose have a predictive value for final visual acuity.
The status of ISe and ELM bands after twelve months of treatment with ranibizumab was associated with visual outcome. Initial visual acuity and status of the ISe band after loading dose are prognostic factors of final visual acuity.
We studied associations of genetic polymorphisms in age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 (ARMS2) and complement factor H (CFH) in nonagenarians with age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
This case-control study comprised 2737 persons (1204 controls, 1433 AMD cases), including 166 nonagenarians (52 controls, 114 AMD cases). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes ARMS2 and CFH were determined. Risk scores were computed by multiple logistic regression analysis, including genetic and environmental risk factors (smoking, hypertension, body mass index, diabetes) for different age groups (<70, 70-79, 80-89, ≥ 90 years [nonagenarians]).
In nonagenarians, ARMS2 showed the weakest associations with AMD (odds ratio [OR] = 1.52, P = 0.127) compared to the other groups (OR, 70 years = 2.23, P = 1.03 × 10(-13); OR, 70-79 years = 2.70, P = 1.00 × 10(-13); OR, 80-89 years = 3.11, P = 6.56 × 10(-8)). For CFH, ORs for AMD increased with age (<70 years OR = 1.96, P = 1.80 × 10(-11); 70-79 years OR = 1.89, P = 4.48 × 10(-13); 80-89 years OR = 2.71, P = 1.28 × 10(-7)), but decreased again in the nonagenarians (OR = 2.21, P = 0.005). Compared to the group <70 years, reduced minor allele frequencies (MAFs) for AMD patients were observed in the nonagenarians (CFH 0.54 vs. 0.43, P = 0.009; ARMS2 0.44 vs. 0.29, P = 2.97 × 10(-5)), while the MAFs in controls were not significantly different. The genetic risk score revealed the lowest discriminative power in the nonagenarians with an area-under-curve (AUC) of 0.658 for receiver-operating characteristics (AUC 80-89 years = 0.768, 70-79 years = 0.704, <70 years = 0.682), while no significant difference was seen for the environmental risk score (AUC < 70 years = 0.579, 70-79 years = 0.567, 80-89 years = 0.600, >90 years = 0.608).
Risk alleles in CFH and ARMS2 have a significantly smaller effect on AMD development in nonagenarians, while environmental factors retain a similar effect.
To investigate the clinical characteristics and therapeutic outcome of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) in 1 eye, without drusen in the fellow eye.
Medical records of 381 patients were analyzed to identify the cases. The main outcomes included Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and change in central retinal thickness (CRT). These parameters were reviewed at baseline, first follow-up visit, and after 6, 12, and 24 months.
Out of 381 patients, 29 cases (8%) were included (of whom 3 had polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy [PCV]) who were treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) therapy which was supplemented by photodynamic therapy (PDT) in the PCV patients. Overall, no statistically significant change in mean BCVA was observed during follow-up. BCVA improved or remained stable (defined as a gain in BCVA, a stable BCVA, or a loss of <5 ETDRS letters) in 22 patients (76%), and 7 patients (23%) had lost ≥5 ETDRS letters at final follow-up. A gain of ≥15 ETDRS letters at final follow-up was seen in 5 patients (17%). Mean CRT had decreased significantly with 99 µm (<i>P</i><0.001) at 24 months after the initial visit.
There is a clinical spectrum of nAMD that is not associated with drusen in the fellow eye. Patients with nAMD without drusen in the fellow eye respond to anti-VEGF treatment and, in cases of PCV, to supplemental PDT. The pathophysiology of this spectrum of nAMD may be different from drusen-associated age-related macular degeneration.
Photon-correlation spectroscopy (PCS) (quasi-elastic light scattering spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering spectroscopy) allows the non-invasively reveal of local dynamics and local heterogeneities of macromolecular systems. The capability of this technique to diagnose the retinal pathologies by in-vivo investigations of spatial anomalies of retinas displaying non-exudative senile macular degeneration was evaluated. Further, the potential use of the technique for the diagnosis of the macular degeneration was analyzed and displayed by the Receiver Operating Curve (ROC).
The maculae and the peripheral retina of 73 normal eyes and of 26 eyes afflicted by an early stage of non-exudative senile macular degeneration were characterized by time-correlation functions and analyzed in terms of characteristic decay times and apparent size distributions.
The characteristics of the obtained time-correlation functions of the eyes afflicted with nonexudative macular degeneration and of normal eyes differed significantly, which could be referred to a significant change of the nano- and microstructure of the investigated pathologic maculas.
Photon-correlation spectroscopy is able to assess the macromolecular and microstructural aberrations in the macula afflicted by non-exudative, senile macular degeneration. It has been demonstrated that macromolecules of this disease show a characteristic abnormal behavior in the macula.
To analyze adherence to follow-up over 5 years in patients treated with intravitreal ranibizumab for exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in a tertiary health care center. To investigate factors associated with failure to continue follow-up.
Retrospective chart review of all consecutive patients with exudative AMD, who received their first intravitreal ranibizumab injection at the Créteil Intercommunal University Hospital Eye Clinic between October 1, 2006 and March 31, 2007. Patient clinical characteristics at baseline and at the last follow-up visit were recorded. Distance from home to hospital was measured for each patient. A multiple-choice telephone survey was conducted for patients lost to follow-up to determine the main reasons for failure to continue follow-up.
Two hundred and one patients were included. The rate of loss to follow-up over the 5-year period was 57% (115/201). Fifty-eight patients lost to follow-up completed the questionnaire. The main reasons reported by patients for follow-up discontinuation were long distance from home to hospital (51.7%, 30/58), subjective dissatisfaction with the benefits of intravitreal injections (34.5%, 20/58), and the excessive burden of periodic follow-up visits (24.1%, 14/58). Three factors were significantly associated with follow-up discontinuation: high age at baseline (82.2 vs. 76.5 years, P<0.001), poor best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at baseline (42.5 vs. 51.0 letters, P=0.020), and long distance from home to hospital (132 vs. 17.1km, P<0.001).
In this study, adherence to follow-up over 5 years was poor. Age and BCVA at baseline and distance from home to hospital were independently associated with long-term adherence.
To evaluate results of treatment of choroidal neovascularization due to age-related macular degeneration with aflibercept in a group of patients representative for Polish population.
Three intravitreal injections of 2.0 mg of aflibercept were administrated to 48 eyes with active choroidal neovascularization at the four week intervals. In the evaluated population there were 19 eyes previously treated with other anti-VEGF drugs and 29 treatment naive eyes.
The mean best corrected visual acuity at baseline in the entire group was 0.47. During the follow-up exam after the first injection, the best corrected visual acuity increased to 0.58. After the second and third injection, it reached the level of 0.62 and 0.63, respectively. Such improvement in visual acuity was accompanied by the reduction of central retinal thickness. Eyes with intraretinal fluid presence confirmed in baseline spectral domain optical coherence tomography had significantly lower best corrected visual acuity throughout the entire follow up.
Three intravitreal aflibercept injections in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration resulted in significant improvement of best corrected visual acuity and reduction of central retinal thickness both in eyes previously treated using other anti-VEGF drugs and newly diagnosed ones. aflibercept, neovascular age-related macular degeneration, choroidal neovascularization, anti-VEGF treatment, optical coherence tomography.
The disruption of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) function and the degeneration of photoreceptors are cardinal features of age related macular degeneration (AMD); however there are still gaps in our understanding of underlying biological processes. Excess homocysteine (Hcy) has been reported to be elevated in plasma of patients with AMD. This study aimed to evaluate the direct effect of hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) on structure and function of RPE. Initial studies in a mouse model of HHcy, in which cystathionine-β-synthase (cbs) was deficient, revealed abnormal RPE cell morphology with features similar to that of AMD upon optical coherence tomography (OCT), fluorescein angiography (FA), histological, and electron microscopic examinations. These features include atrophy, vacuolization, hypopigmentation, thickened basal laminar membrane, hyporeflective lucency, choroidal neovascularization (CNV), and disturbed RPE-photoreceptor relationship. Furthermore, intravitreal injection of Hcy per se in normal wild type (WT) mice resulted in diffuse hyper-fluorescence, albumin leakage, and CNV in the area of RPE. In vitro experiments on ARPE-19 showed that Hcy dose-dependently reduced tight junction protein expression, increased FITC dextran leakage, decreased transcellular electrical resistance, and impaired phagocytic activity. Collectively, our results demonstrated unreported effects of excess Hcy levels on RPE structure and function that lead to the development of AMD-like features. 
Iron (Fe) accumulation in cytoplasmic storages of the retina and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) with age has been reported to be a contributing factor to the onset and progression of Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD). This work investigated whether iron can also be stored in specialized metal-binding melanosomes of the RPE and choroid and in age pigments of the RPE (lipofuscin and melanolipofuscin). As accumulation of debris in Bruch's membrane is an additional hallmark of AMD, the elemental composition of Bruch's membrane was also investigated. Perimacular sections of the retina-choroid complex of six eyes of AMD donors and of seven age-matched healthy controls were investigated using Analytical Electron Microscopy (AEM). The melanosomes of the RPE and choroidal melanocytes of all AMD donors contained about two times higher iron mole fractions (0.06-0.07 at%) compared to the controls, which showed only minor iron mole fractions at or below the detection limit of 0.02 at%. Only melanosomes that contained iron, showed also significant lead peaks (both AMD and control about 0.08 at%). In addition, the electron-dense part of melanolipofuscin granules in the RPE accumulated iron and lead, both for control and AMD donors. Iron in lipofuscin was below the detection limit. The elastic layer of Bruch's membrane of all AMD donors also contained significantly higher iron mole fractions compared to controls (about 0.08 at% Fe), predominantly in areas that were also rich in calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P), suggesting calcification. Indeed, five of the six AMD donors but only one of the seven controls showed nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite calcifications. Note that such nanocrystalline material can only be detected in EM samples without heavy metal (osmiumtetroxide, uranylacetate) staining. In conclusion, iron accumulation in melanosomal storages and within calcified Bruch's membrane is more pronounced in donors suffering from AMD compared to age-matched controls. This work underlines the common hypothesis that heavy metal homeostasis plays an important role in age-related neuropathy.
The formation of macular hole after receiving anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) therapy is rare. We report a case of macular hole that occurred after intravitreal injection of an anti-VEGF agent for age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in a patient, who underwent vitrectomy combined with choroidal neovascularization (CNV) removal.
A 64-year-old female with AMD affecting her right eye received an intravitreal injection of an anti-VEGF agent. After treatment, we identified a full thickness macular hole (MH) that was associated with the rapid resolution of the macular edema and contraction of the CNV. After performing vitrectomy combined with CNV removal, the MH closed and her visual acuity improved. Examination of the removed CNV revealed a network of microvessels devoid of pericytes.
and Importance: The present findings suggest that rapid resolution of macular edema and contraction of the CNV and/or mild increase in the vitreous traction after anti-VEGF therapy could potentially cause MH. CNV removal via the MH may be an acceptable procedure, if the MH remains open, the CNV is of the classic type, and it spares a central portion of the fovea.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the quality of life in patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and compare it with that of healthy controls. Additionally, our study aims to investigate the possible risk factors for poor quality of life in AMD patients.
Participants in the study were 114 patients with AMD, 63 male and 51 female, mean-aged 76.5 ± 6.1 years. Demographic data, lifestyle factors, and medical history were recorded. All patients underwent a routine examination for AMD, including best-corrected visual acuity measurement, dilated fundoscopy and optical coherence tomography, and completed three questionnaires assessing quality of life (SF-36, EQ-5D, NEI VFQ-25). In addition, 100 controls, adjusted for gender and age, were included in the study. Risk factors for quality of life in AMD patients were investigated. Univariate analysis was performed using SPSS 22.0.
Patients with AMD scored lower in vision- and health-related quality-of-life questionnaires compared to controls. Risk factors associated with quality of life in patients with AMD were found to be the female gender, alcohol consumption, the presence of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, myosceletal problems, migraine, anxiety/depression, subretinal or intraretinal fluid, pigment epithelium detachment, previous treatment for AMD, visual acuity, the stage of the disease, and the integrity of the ellipsoid zone.
Patients with AMD presented lower quality of life in comparison with controls. Potential risk factors should be taken into account and clinicians should thus focus on the most vulnerable subgroups.
To examine factors associated with the apparent growth of geographic atrophy (GA) in a consecutive series of eyes with treatment-naive neovascular age-related macular degeneration receiving intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy on a treat-and-extend regimen.
This was a retrospective cohort study. Two independent graders identified areas of GA using near-infrared reflectance imaging and spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). Neovascular lesion subtypes were classified based on fluorescein angiography (FA) as occult choroidal neovascularization, classic choroidal neovascularization, retinal angiomatous proliferation, or mixed choroidal neovascularization, and by the anatomical classification system which utilizes FA and SD-OCT as Types 1 (sub-retinal pigment epithelium), 2 (subretinal), 3 (intraretinal), or mixed neovascularization.
Ninety-one patients (94 eyes) fit the inclusion criteria, of which 52 eyes (55.3%) experienced apparent GA growth. The odds of developing apparent GA were significantly lower in Type 1 neovascularization compared to the other lesion types (P < 0.001). Using both FA and SD-OCT to classify neovascular age-related macular degeneration significantly improves the goodness of fit in the correlation between apparent GA growth and baseline neovascular lesion type (P < 0.001).
Treatment-naive neovascular age-related macular degeneration eyes with Type 1 neovascularization at baseline were less likely to develop GA than eyes with other types. The correlation between apparent GA growth and subtype of neovascularization is stronger when lesions are classified with an anatomic grading that utilizes both FA and SD-OCT.
To explore decline in visual acuity in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (n-AMD) awaiting intravitreal bevacizumab or ranibizumab treatment following initial diagnosis and after disease reactivation.
Retrospective analysis of 74 treatment-naïve patients (84 eyes) in two centers in Córdoba, Argentina. The time between treatment indication and intravitreal injection, and the changes in BCVA produced during this delay were studied in both periods. A linear regression model to search the impact of time on progression visual impairment was conducted.
In both periods, a significant reduction in vision occurred awaiting intravitreal injection. The longer the delay, the greater the vision loss (R2 = 0.55 p < 0.01) and the less improvement following treatment (Pearson coefficient -0.26). The result of the model shows that the change in vision as a function of initial delay were best described by a polynomic model with a mean loss of 5 letters in the first 3 weeks, a slowdown in the rate of change of VA, and a dependence of visual acuity at the moment of diagnosis . The loss of visual acuity after reactivation shows the same behavior as at the onset of the disease but independent of visual acuity prior to reactivation.
Visual loss awaiting injection intravitreal anti-VEGF is clinically significant and with an asymptotic pattern, with early rapid loss of vision in both the onset of the disease and the reactivation. Initiation of anti-VEGF treatment must be undertaken urgently, as should retreatment of disease activation to reduce visual loss.
To investigate the relationship between macular pigment (MP) and visual function in subjects with early age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
121 subjects with early AMD enrolled as part of the Central Retinal Enrichment Supplementation Trial (CREST; ISRCTN13894787) were assessed using a range of psychophysical measures of visual function, including best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), letter contrast sensitivity (CS), mesopic and photopic CS, mesopic and photopic glare disability (GD), photostress recovery time (PRT), reading performance and subjective visual function, using the National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire-25 (NEI VFQ-25). MP was measured using customised heterochromatic flicker photometry.
Letter CS, mesopic and photopic CS, photopic GD and mean reading speed were each significantly (p<0.05) associated with MP across a range of retinal eccentricities, and these statistically significant relationships persisted after controlling for age, sex and cataract grade. BCVA, NEI VFQ-25 score, PRT and mesopic GD were unrelated to MP after controlling for age, sex and cataract grade (p>0.05, for all).
MP relates positively to many measures of visual function in unsupplemented subjects with early AMD. The CREST trial will investigate whether enrichment of MP influences visual function among those afflicted with this condition.
ISRCTN13894787.
To determine the presenting characteristics of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration with long-term remission (LTR), which was defined as the absence of intraretinal/subretinal fluid, or hemorrhage, and absence of leakage on fluorescein angiography for longer than 6 months while on as-needed antivascular endothelial growth factor treatment.
The presenting characteristics of patients with LTR were compared with a control group including 32 eyes of 28 age-, gender-, and ethnicity-matched patients who did not achieve LTR.
Seventy-four percent of patients in the LTR group had Type 1 choroidal neovascular membrane and 18.5% had retinal angiomatous proliferation. In the control group, 28 eyes had Type 1 choroidal neovascular membrane (87.5%), and none of the patients had retinal angiomatous proliferation; overall, there was a significant difference in lesion types between the 2 groups (P = 0.036). Eyes with LTR at presentation had significantly thinner subfoveal choroidal thickness (147 vs. 178 μm, P = 0.04). There was more intraretinal fluid and less subretinal fluid at the presentation in the remission group (59.3% intraretinal fluid and 11.1% subretinal fluid) compared with the control group (28.1% intraretinal fluid and 34.4% subretinal fluid, P = 0.03).
The presence of retinal angiomatous proliferation, thinner choroidal thickness, more intraretinal fluid, and less subretinal fluid at presentation were associated with LTR in patients receiving as-needed treatment for age-related macular degeneration.
Recent studies have suggested that the use of systemic beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers can induce regression of choroidal neovascularization in rodent models. The purpose of this study is to evaluate if these agents have a protective effect against the development of choroidal neovascularization in patients with age-related macular degeneration.
In this single-center retrospective case-control study, the charts of 250 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration were compared with those of 250 controls with dry age-related macular degeneration. Charts were reviewed for current and past use of beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers. Frequency tables were generated, and associations were examined using chi-square tests, t-tests, and multivariate logistic regression.
There was no statistically significant difference between rates of beta-blocker use (P = 0.57), angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors use (P = 0.20), or angiotensin receptor blockers use (P = 0.61) between the 2 groups. Additionally, there was no statistically significant difference between rates of use of combinations of the above drugs between the two groups.
Although there is growing evidence that beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers can induce regression of choroidal neovascularization in rodent models, these medications do not seem to confer a protective effect against the development of choroidal neovascularization in patients with age-related macular degeneration.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of blindness among older adults in the developed world. Although the pathological mechanisms have not been definitively elucidated, evidence suggests a key role for mitochondrial (mt) dysfunction. The current study used our unique collection of human retinal samples graded for the donor's stage of AMD to address fundamental questions about mtDNA damage in the retina. To evaluate the distribution of mtDNA damage in the diseased retina, damage in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and neural retina from individual donors were compared. To directly test a long-held belief that the macula is selectively damaged with AMD, RPE mtDNA damage was measured in the macula and peripheral sections from individual donors. Small segments of the entire mt genome were examined to determine whether specific regions are preferentially damaged. Our results show that mtDNA damage is limited to the RPE, equivalent mtDNA damage is found in the macular and peripheral RPE, and sites of damage are localized to regions of the mt genome that may impact mt function. These results provide a scientific basis for targeting the RPE mitochondria with therapies that protect and enhance mt function as a strategy for combating AMD. 
To observe the clinical efficacy of intravitreal injection of conbercept in the treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration (wAMD), optical coherence tomography (OCT) and the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was observed to measure the changes of anatomical changes of central macular thickness (CMT) and the area and volume of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) uplift. Fifteen patients (15 eyes) with wet AMD were enrolled in this study. All patients underwent intravitreal injection of conbercept of 0.05 mL once. After 1 week, 1 month, and 3 months, OCT and BCVA were used to examine and to compare with the preoperative and postoperative central macular thickness and RPE uplift area. BCVA (median) increased respectively from 0.12 ± 0.13 to 0.21 ± 0.15 at 1 week, to 0.90 ± 0.25 at 1 month, to 0.38 ± 0.17 at 3 months (p < .001). The thickness of central macular decreased from 500 ± 25 μm to 256 ± 19 μm, 221 ± 29 μm, and 215 ± 14 μm, respectively. The normal physiological structure and stratification of the macular area were clear gradually. Conbercept treatment of wet AMD can significantly improve visual acuity, after 1 month up to the plateau, 3 months of continuous drug injection can make the vision maintained at a high stage, and macular retinal normal structural morphology recovery is good, the treatment has no obvious adverse reactions, and with good security.
To compare 12-month outcomes and clinical presentations between first and second eyes of patients who developed neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) in both eyes and received ranibizumab intravitreal therapy (IVT).
This is a retrospective case series of 45 patients undergoing IVT for unilateral nAMD who subsequently developed second-eye nAMD. At each visit, both eyes underwent visual acuity (VA) measurement and optical coherence tomography (OCT).
In second eyes, 53% were asymptomatic at baseline, with OCT retinal fluid as the only sign of nAMD among 33% of patients. In eyes with baseline VA >6/9, 82% of second treated eyes maintained this vision versus 12% of first eyes (p = 0.05). At 12 months, 70% of second eyes were fluid free versus 41% of first eyes (p = 0.02).
A large proportion of patients are asymptomatic at diagnosis of second-eye nAMD. Early intervention following earlier detection of nAMD in the second eye may lead to improved clinical outcomes.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible vision loss and blindness in developed nations. AMD is anticipated to affect 196 million people worldwide, by 2020. However, the etiology of this disease remains unknown. Aging, genetic, and environmental influences have generally been implicated as major etiologic factors. We sought to examine the hypothesis that consumption of the 'displacing foods of modern commerce,' which equate to processed, nutrient-deficient and potentially toxic foods, may be the primary and proximate cause of AMD. To evaluate this hypothesis, we ran correlative AMD prevalence data against well-known proxy markers of processed food consumption, namely, sugar and vegetable oils, in 25 nations. In twenty-one nations, published studies provided AMD prevalence data and in four Pacific Island nations, practicing ophthalmologists in the regions completed retrospective chart analyses to estimate AMD prevalence in their respective regions. To estimate AMD prevalence historically, an extensive review of published papers and ophthalmic literature was completed. This review indicates that, between the years 1851 and 1930, AMD was a medical rarity worldwide, which then rose modestly in prevalence in the 1930s in the U.S. and U.K, finally elevating to epidemic proportions by 1975 in the U.S. Numerous developed nations have followed suit in recent decades. Simultaneously, between approximately 1880 and 2009, processed, nutrient-deficient foods gradually supplanted and displaced whole, unprocessed, nutrient-dense foods in developed nations, such that by 2009, 63 percent of the American diet was made up of nutrient-deficient foods in the form of refined white flour, added sugars, vegetable oils, and artificially created trans fats. The correlative data in 25 nations shows that increasing sugar and polyunsaturated vegetable oil consumption is invariably associated with new onset or rising prevalence of AMD, generally within about 30-40years of the beginning of increasing consumption of these proxy marker processed food components. The correlative data also demonstrates that, when consumption of sugar is moderate, but "harmful vegetable oil" consumption remains extremely low or absent, the prevalence of AMD remains rare. This study supports the hypothesis that the 'displacing foods of modern commerce,' which equate to processed, nutrient-deficient, and potentially toxic foods, are the primary and proximate cause of AMD. This study also supports the conclusion that macular degeneration is entirely preventable, through ancestral dietary strategy and avoidance of processed foods. Finally, this research has implications for patients with existing early and intermediate stages of AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most common cause of permanent central visual acuity loss in persons over 65 years of age in industrialized nations. Today, intravitreal vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors are the mainstay of treatment worldwide. Areas covered: The following review covers the current treatments and challenges of wet AMD management. It also covers emerging therapies including radiation, latest generation anti-VEGF agents, and combination therapies. Expert opinion: Current neovascular AMD therapy is aimed at decreasing the VEGF effect at the choroidal neovascularization (CNV) complex. The most important existing challenges in the treatment of neovascular AMD are improving visual outcomes, decreasing the treatment burden, and minimizing geographic atrophy. Clinicians are using many treatment strategies to minimize intravitreal injections without sacrificing visual outcomes. Combination of anti-VEGF therapy with other previously available treatments that target a different pathophysiological mechanism may be a reasonable clinical strategy to minimize intravitreal injections. Many exciting novel drugs that target newly discovered pathways associated with CNV development and progression hold clinical promise. The results of ongoing randomized clinical trials will answer the important concerns surrounding new drugs and delivery devices: safety and visual outcomes.
It has been suggested that systemic inflammation increases the risk of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Given that chronic immune modulation is present in patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), the risk of AMD in these patients may be increased.
To compare the risk of AMD in patients with MPNs with the risk of AMD in matched controls from the general population.
A nationwide population-based cohort study using Danish registers was conducted of all patients in Denmark who received a diagnosis between January 1, 1994, and December 31, 2013, of essential thrombocythemia, polycythemia vera, myelofibrosis, or unclassifiable MPNs. For each patient, 10 age- and sex-matched controls were included. All patients without prior AMD were followed up from the date of diagnosis (or corresponding entry date for the controls) until the first AMD diagnosis, death or emigration, or December 31, 2013, whichever occurred first. Data analysis was performed from April 1, 2015, to October 31, 2016.
Incidence of AMD recorded in specialized hospital-based care. The rates and absolute risk of AMD were calculated. Using Cox proportional hazards regression models, smoking and risk-time adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) between patients and controls were calculated. In addition, HRs of neovascular AMD after 2006 were calculated since antivascular endothelial growth factor treatment was introduced nationwide at hospitals thereafter.
A total of 7958 patients with MPNs (4279 women [53.8%] and 3679 men [46.2%]; mean [SD] age at diagnosis, 66.4 [14.3] years) were included in the study. The rate of AMD per 1000 person-years at risk was 5.2 (95% CI, 4.6-5.9) for patients with MPNs (2628 with essential thrombocythemia, 3063 with polycythemia vera, 547 with myelofibrosis, and 1720 with unclassifiable MPNs) and 4.3 (95% CI, 4.1-4.4) for the 77 445 controls, while the 10-year risk of AMD was 2.4% (95% CI, 2.1%-2.8%) for patients with MPNs and 2.3% (95% CI, 2.2%-2.4%) for the controls. The risk of AMD was increased overall for patients with MPNs (adjusted HR, 1.3; 95% CI, 1.1-1.5), with adjusted HRs for the subtypes of 1.2 (95% CI, 1.0-1.6) for essential thrombocythemia, 1.4 (95% CI, 1.2-1.7) for polycythemia vera, 1.7 (95% CI, 0.8-4.0) for myelofibrosis, and 1.5 (95% CI, 1.1-2.1) for unclassifiable MPNs. In addition, patients with MPNs had a higher risk of neovascular AMD (adjusted HR, 1.4; 95% CI, 1.2-1.6).
Our results suggest that patients with MPNs are at increased risk of AMD, supporting the possibility that systemic inflammation is involved in the pathogenesis of AMD.
The use of imaging for age-related macular degeneration (AMD) depends on how it benefits clinical management and on reimbursement. The latter should relate to the former. This review assesses how different forms of AMD can be imaged and what information this provides. For nonneovascular AMD high-resolution optical coherence tomography (OCT), autofluorescence, and near infrared imaging can identify the type of drusen, such as reticular pseudodrusen, which influences prognosis, and the amount of atrophy, for which phase 3 trials are underway. Clarifying the correct diagnosis for late-onset Stargardt and macular telangiectasia, if treatment becomes available, will be especially important. Choroidal thickness can be measured and changes with anti‒vascular endothelial growth factor treatment, but how this influences management is less clear. The finding of a thick choroid may alter the diagnosis to pachychoroid neovasculopathy, which may have a different treatment response. Peripheral retinal changes are commonly found on ultrawide-field imaging but their importance is not yet determined. The mainstay of imaging is OCT, which can detect neovascular AMD by detecting thickening and be used for follow-up, as the presence or absence of thickening is the main determinant of treatment. Higher resolution systems and now OCT angiography are able to distinguish neovascular type, especially type 2 choroidal neovascularization but also polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy and retinal angiomatous proliferation. Fundus fluorescein and indocyanine green angiographies still have a role, although that partly depends on whether photodynamic therapy is being considered. Automated image analysis and machine learning will be increasingly important in supporting clinician decisions.
We compared early age-related macular degeneration (AMD) lesion characteristics between white Australians and Singaporean Asians.
Participants of the Blue Mountains Eye Study (BMES; whites, n = 3508) and the Singapore Epidemiology of Eye Disease Study (SEED; Malay, n = 3280, Indian, n = 3400, and Chinese, n = 3353) underwent examinations, including retinal photography. The AMD lesions were assessed following the Wisconsin AMD grading protocol by the same photographic grader. Prevalence and characteristics of early AMD lesions were compared between the BMES and the SEED. The associations between ethnicity and early AMD lesion types were analyzed using logistic regression models adjusting for age, sex, smoking status, lipids, and genetic polymorphisms associated with AMD.
After age-standardization to the BMES population, the prevalence of distinct soft drusen was significantly higher in Singaporeans compared to Australians (23.9%, 95% confidence interval [CI] 22.9-25.0 vs. 6.2%, 95% CI 5.3-7.0), with an adjusted odds ratio (OR) of 4.6 (95% CI 3.4-6.0). In contrast, the prevalence of indistinct soft or reticular drusen was significantly lower in Singaporeans compared to Australians (6.5%, 95% CI 5.9-7.1 vs. 8.3%, 95% CI 7.4-9.3, with nonsignificant adjusted OR of 1.2, 95% CI 0.8-1.7). Soft drusen of any type were present frequently at the inner and outer macula (within a zone ≥500 to <3000 μm radius from the foveal center) among Singaporeans, while among Australians soft drusen were present more frequently at the central macula (<500 μm radius).
Singaporean Asians had a milder spectrum of early AMD lesions and lesion characteristics (predominantly distinct soft drusen and noncentral location) compared to white Australians.
To examine whether slowed rod-mediated dark adaptation (DA) in adults with normal macular health at baseline is associated with the incidence of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) 3 years later.
Prospective cohort.
Adults aged ≥60 years were recruited from primary care ophthalmology clinics. Both eyes were required to be step 1 (normal) on the Age-Related Eye Disease Study 9-step AMD classification system based on color fundus photographs graded by experienced and masked evaluators.
Rod-mediated DA was assessed at baseline in 1 eye after a photobleach using a computerized dark adaptometer with targets centered at 5° on the inferior vertical meridian. Speed of DA was characterized by the rod-intercept value, with abnormal DA defined as rod-intercept ≥12.3 minutes. Demographic characteristics, best-corrected visual acuity, and smoking status were also assessed. Log-binomial regression was used to calculate unadjusted and adjusted risk ratios (RRs) and associated 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the association between baseline DA and incident AMD.
Presence of AMD at the 3-year follow-up visit for the eye tested for DA at baseline.
Both baseline and follow-up visits were completed by 325 persons (mean age, 67.8 years). At baseline, 263 participants had normal DA with mean rod-intercept of 9.1 (standard deviation [SD], 1.5), and 62 participants had abnormal DA with mean rod-intercept of 15.1 (SD, 4.0). After adjustment for age and smoking, those with abnormal DA in the tested eye at baseline were approximately 2 times more likely to have AMD in that eye (RR, 1.92; 95% CI, 1.03-3.62) by the time of the follow-up visit, compared with those who had normal DA at baseline.
Delayed rod-mediated DA in older adults with normal macular health is associated with incident early AMD 3 years later, and thus is a functional biomarker for early disease. The biological relevance of this test is high, because it assesses translocation of vitamin A derivatives across the retinal pigment epithelium and Bruch's membrane, 2 tissues with prominent age- and AMD-related pathology.
The effects of repeated intravitreal aflibercept injection (IAI) on the corneal endothelium were studied in patients with unilateral neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
RE-VIEW was a phase 4, open-label, single-arm, multicenter study. Patients received IAI every 8 weeks after 3 monthly doses. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy was performed at all study visits. The central corneal endothelial health was evaluated by specular microscopy in the treated versus untreated fellow eyes at baseline and weeks 24 and 52.
No slit-lamp abnormalities were noted in 154 enrolled patients (eyes). Baseline versus 52-week mean (±SD) endothelial morphometric values (n = 118) for the treated versus untreated fellow eyes were respectively as follows: endothelial cell density was 2410 ± 364 versus 2388 ± 384 cells/mm at baseline and remained unchanged at 2401 ± 353 versus 2376 ± 364 cells/mm at 52 weeks (P = 0.87); the coefficient of variation was 33.5 ± 4.4% versus 34.0 ± 5.0% at baseline and remained unchanged at 34.2 ± 4.7% versus 34.1 ± 4.9% at 52 weeks (P = 0.18); the percentage of hexagonal cells was 59.5 ± 5.8% versus 59.6 ± 6.4% at baseline and remained unchanged at 59.5 ± 6.0% versus 59.5 ± 5.8% at 52 weeks (P = 0.96).
Repeated IAI for 52 weeks had no apparent corneal endothelial toxicity noted on specular microscopy in patients treated for neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
To investigate the associations of the Wnt modulators Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (WIF-1) and Dickkopf 3 (DKK-3) in the aqueous humor with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) and to determine their clinical implications.
Seventy-four nAMD patients initially treated with an intravitreal injection of ranibizumab (IVR) and 74 age- and sex-matched controls were studied. Aqueous humor WIF-1 and DKK-3 levels were measured by Western blotting and an ELISA before and 1 month after two consecutive IVRs (pre- and post-IVR). Visual acuity assessments and spectral domain optical coherence tomography were performed pre- and post-IVR.
Western blotting showed increased WIF-1 and DKK-3 in 12 nAMD patients compared with 12 controls. The ELISA analysis demonstrated elevated WIF-1 (pre) and DKK-3 (pre) in 62 patients compared with 62 controls (54.7 vs. 23.0 and 114.3 vs. 93.0 ng/mL, respectively). In multivariate analyses, high WIF-1 (pre) levels were associated with increased disruption in the photoreceptor junction's inner and outer segments (IS/OS) (pre and post) and high WIF-1 (post) levels. Interestingly, WIF-1 (pre) levels were significantly higher in type 3 neovascularization (NV) patients than in type 1 or 2 NV (90.5 ± 36.7 vs. 48.3 ± 22.5 and 41.3 ± 28.8 ng/mL, respectively). However, choroidal thickness was not correlated with WIF-1 levels.
We report, for the first time, the possibility of phenotypic, anatomic, and ocular proteomic correlations, demonstrating correlated WIF-1 and DKK-3 upregulation in nAMD patients' aqueous humor. Secreted WIF-1, reflecting the degree of retinal structure damage, may be a new biomarker for the retina's healthy and disease states.
PurposeThe purpose of this study is to evaluate an early switch to aflibecept in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nvAMD) showing partial or lack of response for initial therapy with bevacizumab.MethodsThe Aflibercept as a Second Line Therapy for Neovascular Age Related Macular Degeneration in Israel (ASLI) was a prospective, multicenter, single-arm clinical trial. Eyes with nvAMD having incomplete response to 3-9 prior bevacizumab injections were recruited. Three monthly intravitreal aflibercept (2 mg) injections were administered, followed by two bi-monthly injections and a final examination at week 28. An optional injection was allowed at week 20.ResultsForty-seven eyes of 46 patients (mean±SD age 76±8 years) were recruited. The mean number of prior bevacizumab injections was 5.5±2.9. The mean visual acuity improved from 60.3±10 ETDRS letters at baseline to 63.1±15 letters at week 28 (P=0.02, paired t-test). The central subfield thickness (CST) reduced from 409±127 micron at baseline to 330±110 microns at week 4 (P=0.0002; paired t-test), and 277±70 microns at week 28 (P=0.00002; paired t-test). Twenty-two eyes had three to five prior bevacizumab injections (mean 5.1±0.7), and 25 eyes had six to nine prior injections (7.32±1.2). Both groups had reduced CST from baseline to week 28 (P=0.0004 and P=0.0007; paired t-test, respectively). Thirty-five (75%) eyes required the optional additional aflibercept injection at week 20.ConclusionsThe ASLI study demonstrated improved BCVA and reduced CST following an early switch to aflibercept therapy in eyes with prior incomplete response to initial therapy with three to nine bevacizumab injections.
The incidence of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is unknown in Africa.
To estimate the 6-year cumulative incidence and progression of AMD in older adults (≥50 years old) in Nakuru, Kenya.
This study assessed a population-based cohort with 6-year follow-up of 4414 participants who had a complete assessment. Random cluster sampling with probability proportionate to size procedures was used to select a representative, cross-sectional sample of adults 50 years and older from January 26, 2007, through November 11, 2008. A 6-year follow-up was undertaken from January 7, 2013, through March 12, 2014. On both occasions, a comprehensive ophthalmic examination was performed that included logMAR visual acuity, digital retinal photography, and grading of images at Moorfields Eye Hospital Reading Centre. Data were collected on general health and risk factors.
Incident AMD in participants with no AMD at baseline and progression from early to late AMD.
A total of 1453 of the 2900 individuals (50.1%) at risk for AMD were followed up after 6 years (mean [SD] age, 60.7 [8.2] years; 635 female [49.5%]; 799 Kikuyu [62.3%], 324 Kalenjin [25.3%], and 159 other [12.4%]); 1282 had data on AMD status at follow-up. Of these, 202 developed early AMD, and no participants developed late AMD. The 6-year weighted (for loss to follow-up) cumulative incidence of early AMD was 164.2 per 1000 persons (95% CI, 136.7-195.9 per 1000 persons). Two individuals with baseline early AMD from the 142 at risk had developed late AMD at follow-up, with a 6-year cumulative incidence of progression from early to late AMD of 24.5 per 1000 persons (95% CI, 5.0-111.7 per 1000 persons). Cumulative incidence of AMD increased with age (≥80 years old vs 50-59 years old: 1.8; 95% CI, 0.9-3.5) and was higher in women (female vs male: 1.6; 95% CI, 1.2-2.1) and persons with diabetes (diabetes vs no diabetes: 1.7; 95% CI, 1.0-2.8).
In Kenya, more than 100 000 estimated new cases of AMD, mainly early AMD, will develop every year in individuals 50 years or older, although a 50% loss to follow-up and wide CIs for progression to late AMD limit definitive conclusions from these findings.
To define the role of increased fundus autofluorescence (FAF), a surrogate for lipofuscin content, as a risk factor for progression of geographic atrophy (GA).
Prospective natural history cohort study, the GAIN (Characterization of geographic atrophy progression in patients with age-related macular degeneration).
setting: Single-center study conducted in Barcelona, Spain.
After screening of 211 patients, 109 eyes of 82 patients with GA secondary to age-related macular degeneration and a minimum follow-up of 6 months were included.
Lipofuscin content was classified independently by 2 masked observers according to FAF patterns described previously. Bivariate, stratified, and multivariable analyses were used to explore the associations between GA growth and independent variables. Mediation analysis was used to evaluate the contribution of FAF patterns to GA progression.
Progression of GA in mm(2)/year as measured with FAF.
Median follow-up was 18 months (range, 6-42). Median GA growth was 1.61 mm(2)/year. FAF, baseline area of atrophy, and time of follow-up were independently associated with GA progression (P < .004). FAF patterns and baseline area of atrophy were strongly associated (P < .0001), suggesting potential confounding. Mediation analysis suggested that most of the effect of FAF patterns on GA growth was actually caused by baseline area of atrophy.
FAF patterns, baseline area of atrophy, and time of follow-up were associated with GA progression. However, FAF patterns seem to be a consequence (not a cause) of enlarging atrophy and their effect on GA progression seems mostly driven by baseline area of atrophy.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible blindness in the elderly population in the Western world. AMD is a clinically heterogeneous disease presenting with drusen, pigmentary changes, geographic atrophy and/or choroidal neovascularization. Due to its heterogeneous presentation, it can be challenging to distinguish AMD from several macular diseases that can mimic the features of AMD. This clinical overlap may potentially lead to misdiagnosis. In this review, we discuss the characteristics of AMD and the macular dystrophies that can mimic AMD. The appropriate use of clinical and genetic analysis can aid the clinician to establish the correct diagnosis, and to provide the patient with the appropriate prognostic information. An overview is presented of overlapping and distinguishing clinical features. 
To determine baseline factors that can predict the response of pigment epithelial detachments (PEDs) in neovascular age-related macular degeneration to treatment with intravitreal bevacizumab (IVB).
Patients with newly diagnosed neovascular age-related macular degeneration and PED who were treated exclusively with IVB were included. Response to treatment was defined by change in PED volume (determined using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography). PEDs were classified as either predominantly serous or fibrovascular. Multivariable regression and receiver operating characteristic analyses were performed.
A total of 48 eyes were identified (mean follow-up time 73 weeks). Overall, the response to the first IVB treatment was predictive of the response to treatment at the final visit (P = 0.015). Serous PEDs had a greater decrease in volume at the final visit (P = 0.008). With respect to both PED types, a decrease in PED volume of 21% after the first IVB treatment was predictive of an overall decrease in volume of 30% at the final visit (sensitivity 83%, specificity 76%).
In neovascular age-related macular degeneration, serous PEDs respond more favorably to IVB than fibrovascular PEDs. Overall, for both types of PED, the response to the first treatment is predictive of the final response to treatment. Taken together, the results would suggest that if there is less than 21% reduction in PED volume after the first IVB treatment, and/or the PED is predominantly fibrovascular, then switching to another antivascular endothelial growth factor agent should be considered.
To investigate the potential of multifocal pupillographic objective perimetry to assess changes in retinal function with clinical severity of age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Pupil responses were recorded from 40 subjects with AMD and 23 normal control subjects (mean ± SD age, 71.3 ± 5.1 years). Age-related macular degeneration subjects were classified according to the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) classification system and allocated into one of four AMD severity groups. Three multifocal pupillographic objective perimetry stimulus variants that were identical in luminance but varied in spatiotemporal sequence were used. In one of the three protocols, stimuli were presented with a pedestal flicker for 266 milliseconds at 15 Hz.
On average, response amplitudes demonstrated a significant change in sensitivity with progression from early-stage (0.32 ± 0.08 dB, t = 3.88) to late-stage (-1.60 ± 0.12 dB, t = -12.7) age-related macular degeneration. Response delays followed a similar trend with the longest delays in AREDS4 (57.2 ± 1.9 milliseconds, t = 29.5). Ring analysis identified the largest mean effect on responses within the central 6 degrees of fixation. The NewStimuli protocol achieved the best diagnostic accuracy across all severity groups with area under the curve values of 0.85 ± 0.066 (AREDS1), 0.908 ± 0.085 (AREDS2), 0.929 ± 0.040 (AREDS3), and 1.0 ± 0.0 (AREDS4).
The mean effect of AMD on contraction amplitudes and response delays reflected the severity of disease, and the NewStimuli protocol achieved good diagnostic accuracy across all AMD severity groups. Multifocal pupillographic objective perimetry may potentially be a useful method in monitoring progression of AMD and assessing change in retinal function with novel interventions in early AMD. Longitudinal studies are required to identify biomarkers that predict eyes at risk of progression.
Neovascular age-related macular degeneration is the leading cause of irreversible blindness in people 50 years of age or older in the developed world. As in other chronic diseases, several effective treatments are available, but in clinical daily practice there is an evidence performance gap. The Chronic Care Model represents an evidence-based framework for the care of chronically ill patients and aims at closing that gap. However, no data are available regarding patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
CHARMED is a multicenter randomized controlled trial. The study challenges the hypothesis that the implementation of core elements of the Chronic Care Model (patient empowerment, delivering evidence based information, clinical information system, reminder system with structured follow up and frequent monitoring) via a specially trained Chronic Care Coach in Swiss centres for neovascular age-related macular degeneration results in better visual acuity (primary outcome) and an increased disease specific quality of life (secondary outcome) in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration. According to the power calculation, a total sample size of 352 patients is needed (drop out rate of 25%). 14 specialised medical doctors from leading ophtalmologic centres in Switzerland will include 25 patients. In each centre, a Chronic Care Coach will provide disease specific care according to the Chronic Care Model for intervention group. Patients from the control group will be treated as usual. Baseline measurements will be taken in month III - XII, starting in March 2011. Follow-up data will be collected after 6 months and 1 year.
Multiple studies have shown that implementing Chronic Care Model elements improve clinical outcomes as well as process parameters in different chronic diseases as osteoarthritis, depression or e.g. the cardiovascular risk profile of diabetes patients. This study will be the first to assess this approach in neovascular age-related macular degeneration. If our hypothesis will be confirmed, the implementation of this approach in routine care for patients with with neovascular age-related macular degeneration should be considered.
Current controlled trials ISRCTN32507927.
To describe the prevalence of polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) in a Caucasian population with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (NAMD).
All patients referred to a city AMD service over a 2-year period underwent imaging including Indocyanine Green Angiography at baseline. A panel of experts confirmed the patients with NAMD and diagnosed the lesion type including PCV. The proportion of Caucasian patients with PCV was identified. Two authors independently reviewed clinical imaging and recorded data of patients with PCV on lesion characteristics. Further information including treatments received and visual acuity at different time points was analysed.
A total of 492 patients were diagnosed with NAMD during the 2-year study period. Of these patients, 204 had occult lesions (41.5%). PCV was identified in 45 patients (22.1% of occult NAMD and 9.1% of all NAMD). 23 patients received anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) monotherapy, 8 received verteporfin photodynamic therapy (PDT) monotherapy and the remaining 14 patients were managed with combined PDT and anti-VEGF treatment.
The prevalence of PCV in Caucasians is higher than previously reported. Indocyanine Green Angiography should be a standard investigation for all new patients with NAMD, particularly those with occult NAMD, to avoid missing this important subset.
The preferred approach for the treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is frequent intravitreal injections of the anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents. However, considering the limitations of current anti-VEGF approaches, including the need for frequent injections, inadequate response in some patients, and a relatively short duration of effect, several new therapeutic modalities are under evaluation.
A comprehensive review of the literature was performed on the new treatment modalities for neovascular AMD, and the relevant studies were discussed.
The treatment modalities for neovascular AMD include new anti-VEGF drugs, new drug delivery systems and new targets in the pathogenic cascade of choroidal neovascularization. These new modalities are in different phases of clinical development.
The results of the completed studies reporting the new therapeutic modalities for neovascular AMD thus far are promising.
To report patients with age-related macular degeneration and atypical central retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) defects not attributable to geographic atrophy (GA) or RPE-tears with overlying preserved photoreceptor layers.
Multimodal imaging case-series evaluating the course of atypical RPE- defects in patients with AMD using Color fundus images, Optical coherence tomography (OCT), OCT-Angiography, fundus autofluorescence (FAF) and fluorescein-angiography (FA).
Ten patients were identified. Three patients had a prior RPE-rip and were excluded. Seven patients with a mean follow-up period of 47 ± 38 months after the occurrence of the RPE-defect were included (age range 71-87 years). Mean distance Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at initial presentation was 0.36 ± 0.29logMAR and at last follow-up visit 0.51 ± 0.43logMAR. Patients presented with clinically apparent GA on funduscopy and FAF, but preserved photoreceptor layers on optical coherence tomography (OCT). On FA there was early hyperfluorescence and late pooling visible. Over time, migration of RPE/drusenoid material right above the Bruch's membrane with concomitant decrease of hypoautofluorescence was detectable in 4 cases. An enlargement of the RPE-defect was apparent in the remaining 3 cases. The majority (n = 4) showed a drusenoid pigment epithelium detachment (PED) preceding the lesion.
Beside GA and characteristic RPE-tears, another atypical form of RPE-defect with overlying preserved photoreceptor layers are found in AMD. This so far disregarded subgroup of patients present with reasonable visual function and long-term survival of photoreceptors layers. Repair mechanisms such as ingrowth of RPE/drusenoid material and persistent subretinal fluid (SRF), but also a RPE-independent visual cycle for cone photopigment within the neurosensory retina may contribute to their favorable course.
To describe the multimodal imaging findings of subretinal hyperreflective exudation (SHE) observed in association with choroidal neovascularization and to distinguish SHE from other forms of subretinal hyperreflective material (SHM) seen in patients with age-related macular degeneration and other macular disorders.
A retrospective study on 46 eyes of 42 patients with SHE associated with Types 1, 2, and 3 choroidal neovascularization secondary to neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Patients were examined using multimodal imaging, including color photography, near-infrared reflectance imaging, spectral domain optical coherence tomography, fluorescein angiography, fundus autofluorescence imaging, and indocyanine green angiography. Clinical and imaging characteristics were evaluated at baseline, after the initiation of intravitreal antivascular endothelial growth factor therapy, and during the resolution of SHE.
Forty-five of the 46 eyes were treatment naive. The mean ± SD age at the first detection of SHE was 77.2 ± 10.1 years. The mean ± SD follow-up was 2.1 ± 0.6 years. Fluorescein angiography was performed in 42 eyes and demonstrated leakage and/or staining of underlying or adjacent choroidal neovascularization but not of the SHE itself in all eyes. On fluorescein angiography, SHE was transparent in 29 eyes and blocking in 7 eyes. In 32 eyes, SHE showed isoautofluorescence on fundus autofluorescence imaging, and in 8 eyes, SHE showed varying degrees of hyperautofluorescence. Indocyanine green angiography was performed in eight eyes and demonstrated hyperfluorescence of SHE in seven eyes. In eight eyes, SHE was the only evidence of neovascular activity. All eyes having follow-up (42 eyes) showed resolution of the subretinal material with partial or full reconstitution of the ellipsoid zone after a median of 2 injections range (1-16 injections). Subretinal hyperreflective exudation persisted for a median of 9 weeks (range, 4-60 weeks) after the initiation of treatment. The mean visual acuity before treatment was 0.619 (20/83), and it improved to 0.380 (20/48) (P = 0.03) after the resolution of SHE.
Subretinal hyperreflective exudation differs from other types of SHM based on the findings from multimodal imaging. This novel type of SHM likely represents a sign of active neovascular age-related macular degeneration distinct from subretinal fluid, hemorrhage, neovascular tissue, lipid, pigment hyperplasia, subretinal fibrosis, and the SHM observed with acquired vitelliform lesions. Intravitreal antivascular endothelial growth factor agents can be used to successfully resolve SHE, often resulting in better visual outcomes in eyes manifesting this form of exudation.
To determine whether decreasing illumination of the Pelli-Robson contrast sensitivity (CS) chart and MP-1 microperimeter to low mesopic conditions is more sensitive to vision changes occurring with healthy ageing and in early and intermediate age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and whether these mesopic tests can differentiate visual function between healthy older participants with and without AMD risk genotypes.
Retinal sensitivity was measured in 98 healthy participants (19-85 years) and 21 AMD (AREDS Grade 2/3) patients (73.9 ± 6.5 years) using the Pelli-Robson CS chart and MP-1 microperimeter under low mesopic and standard illumination. The effect of ageing and AMD on retinal sensitivity was estimated using regression analysis. Healthy older participants (>50 years; n = 24) were genotyped for AMD risk genes CFH and/or ARMS2 and retinal sensitivity was compared between genotypes.
With healthy ageing, photopic and mesopic Pelli-Robson CS showed a similar decline (-0.004 log CS/year). In AMD, photopic CS showed a similar decline to healthy ageing (-0.004 log CS/year) while mesopic CS was significantly reduced (-0.007 log CS/year). Both standard and low mesopic microperimetry showed a significant decline (-0.51 and -0.73% contrast/year) with healthy ageing and greater decline (-0.73 and -0.99% contrast/year) with AMD onset. Pelli-Robson CS and microperimetry sensitivity did not differ between AMD risk genotypes in healthy participants.
Mesopic Pelli-Robson CS detects functional deficits before photopic CS in early and intermediate AMD that can be differentiated from ageing. This test can be easily administered in clinical practice and may provide a means for early detection of retinal dysfunction.
To determine whether intraocular treatment with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors change systemic endothelial function (EF) in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
In this prospective, randomized, 2-center, double-masked controlled interventional trial, patients with neovascular and dry AMD were enrolled. Eligible neovascular AMD patients received 2 intravitreal loading doses of either ranibizumab 0.5 mg or bevacizumab 1.25 mg at 4-week intervals and were subsequently followed every 4 weeks and treated according to a pro re nata regime for up to 1 year. Patients with dry AMD served as controls. The primary endpoint was the change in EF assessed by flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) after 2 months of treatment with VEGF inhibitors in patients with AMD compared to patients with dry AMD. FMD was assessed with B-mode high-resolution ultrasonography of the left brachial artery.
24 patients with neovascular AMD and 26 patients with dry ADM were included in the trial. Treatment with VEGF inhibitors did not significantly change FMD (from 4.7 ± 2.4 to 3.9 ± 1.9% after 8 weeks, p = 0.07, and to 5.1 ± 2.0% after 1 year; p = 0.93 vs. baseline, respectively).
EF did not significantly differ between patients with neovascular AMD treated with intravitreal VEGF inhibition and patients with dry AMD.
The aim of this paper was to assess and compare the effects of intravitreal ranibizumab and bevacizumab on retinal vessel diameter in eyes with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Patients with neovascular AMD who underwent intravitreal injection of either ranibizumab or bevacizumab were included. Noninjected fellow eyes served as a control. The main outcome measures were central retinal artery equivalent (CRAE), central retinal vein equivalent (CRVE), and the artery-vein ratio (AVR).
In the ranibizumab group, the mean CRAE value decreased significantly at 1 week and 1 month (p = 0.002). The AVR value decreased significantly at 1 month (p = 0.028). CRVE values did not change at 1 week and 1 month (p = 0.083). In the bevacizumab group, the preinjection CRAE, CRVE, and AVR values did not change through the study period (p = 0.128, p = 0.600, and p = 0.734, respectively).
These results suggest that intravitreal ranibizumab led to significant retinal arteriolar vasoconstriction in eyes with neovascular AMD.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) ranks third among the leading causes of visual impairment with a blindness prevalence rate of 8.7%. Despite several treatment regimens, such as anti-angiogenic drugs, laser therapy, and vitamin supplementation, being available for wet AMD, to date there are no FDA-approved therapies for dry AMD. Substantial evidence implicates mitochondrial damage and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cell death in the pathogenesis of AMD. However, the effects of AMD mitochondria and Humanin G (HNG), a more potent variant of the mitochondrial-derived peptide (MDP) Humanin, on retinal cell survival have not been elucidated. In this study, we characterized mitochondrial and cellular damage in transmitochondrial cybrid cell lines that contain identical nuclei but possess mitochondria from either AMD or age-matched normal (Older-normal (NL)) subjects. AMD cybrids showed (1) reduced levels of cell viability, lower mtDNA copy numbers, and downregulation of mitochondrial replication/transcription genes and antioxidant enzyme genes; and (2) elevated levels of genes related to apoptosis, autophagy and ER-stress along with increased mtDNA fragmentation and higher susceptibility to amyloid-β-induced toxicity compared to NL cybrids. In AMD cybrids, HNG protected the AMD mitochondria, reduced pro-apoptosis gene and protein levels, upregulated gp130 (a component of the HN receptor complex), and increased the protection against amyloid-β-induced damage. In summary, in cybrids, damaged AMD mitochondria mediate cell death that can be reversed by HNG treatment. Our results also provide evidence of Humanin playing a pivotal role in protecting cells with AMD mitochondria. In the future, it may be possible that AMD patient's blood samples containing damaged mitochondria may be useful as biomarkers for this condition. In conclusion, HNG may be a potential therapeutic target for treatment of dry AMD, a debilitating eye disease that currently has no available treatment. Further studies are needed to establish HNG as a viable mitochondria-targeting therapy for dry AMD.
To characterize the natural history and response of age-related macular degeneration-associated peripapillary choroidal neovascularization to anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy.
This was a retrospective case series of patients with peripapillary choroidal neovascularization secondary to neovascular age-related macular degeneration. All patients underwent complete ophthalmologic examination and retinal imaging including fluorescein angiography and spectral domain optical coherence tomography at each visit. Eyes with subretinal or intraretinal macular fluid were treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor monotherapy using a modified as-needed treatment algorithm.
Thirty-three eyes of 27 patients were included. The median age was 82 years (range, 62-94), and the median duration of follow-up was 65 months (range, 6-165). Fourteen eyes (58%) without fovea-involving fluid at baseline subsequently developed exudation after a median observation period of 16 months (range, 4-107). Ten of 24 eyes (42%) without initial macular fluid remained dry during the entire follow-up. The median number of injections required until complete fluid reabsorption was 3 (range, 1-21) during the first treatment cycle. The median time to fluid recurrence was 6 months (range, 3-74).
Peripapillary choroidal neovascularization secondary to wet age-related macular degeneration has a slow progression, may not require treatment for a prolonged period, and responds rapidly to anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment with good visual outcomes.
To assess the long-term outcome of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) treated with multiple intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) injections.
All patients treated with over 30 intravitreal anti-VEGF injections for neovascular AMD between 2007 and 2014 were retrospectively reviewed.
A total of 67 eyes received 2,960 (mean 45 ± 9.1 per eye) anti-VEGF injections. Eyes with good final visual acuity (VA) had better initial VA (p = 0.020) and maintained it. Patients with moderate-to-poor final VA improved significantly after the first 3 monthly injections, and thereafter deteriorated consistently, mostly during the third (p = 0.019) and fourth (p = 0.006) years. Eyes with worse final VA had more intraretinal fluid (p = 0.05) and subretinal fibrosis (p = 0.04).
Two distinct clinical courses were identified: good final VA was associated with initial and long-term stability of good VA; eyes with worse final VA had worse initial VA, progressive deterioration following the initial improvement, and more scarring and intraretinal fluid. This probably underscores the long-term benefits of early detection and treatment.
Lutein and zeaxanthin (L/Z) are the predominant carotenoids which accumulate in the retina of  the eye. The impact of L/Z intake on the risk and progression of age-related macular degeneration (AMD),  a leading cause of blindness in the developed world, has been investigated in cohort studies and clinical  trials. The aims of this review were to critically examine the literature and evaluate the current evidence  relating to L/Z intake and AMD, and describe important food sources and factors that increase the  bioavailability of L/Z, to inform dietary models. Cohort studies generally assessed L/Z from dietary  sources, while clinical trials focused on providing L/Z as a supplement. Important considerations to take  into account in relation to dietary L/Z include: nutrient-rich sources of L/Z, cooking methods, diet variety  and the use of healthy fats. Dietary models include examples of how suggested effective levels of L/Z can  be achieved through diet alone, with values of 5 mg and 10 mg per day described. These diet models  depict a variety of food sources, not only from dark green leafy vegetables, but also include pistachio nuts  and other highly bioavailable sources of L/Z such as eggs. This review and the diet models outlined  provide information about the importance of diet variety among people at high risk of AMD or with early  signs and symptoms of AMD.
Exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most common cause of moderate and severe vision loss in developed countries. Intraocular injections of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF or VEGF-A)-neutralizing proteins provide substantial benefit, but frequent, long-term injections are needed. In addition, many patients experience initial visual gains that are ultimately lost due to subretinal fibrosis. Preclinical studies and early phase clinical trials suggest that combined suppression of VEGF and platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) provides better outcomes than suppression of VEGF alone, due to more frequent regression of neovascularization (NV) and suppression of subretinal fibrosis. We generated a dual variable domain immunoglobulin molecule, ABBV642 that specifically and potently binds and neutralizes VEGF and PDGF-BB. ABBV642 has been optimized for treatment of exudative AMD based on the following design characteristics: 1) high affinity binding to all VEGF-A isoforms and both soluble and extracellular matrix (ECM)-associated PDGF-BB; 2) potential for extended residence time in the vitreous cavity to decrease the frequency of intraocular injections; 3) rapid clearance from systemic circulation compared with molecules with wild type Fc region for normal FcRn binding, which may reduce the risk of systemic complications; and 4) low risk of potential effector function. The bispecificity of ABBV642 allows for a single injection of a single therapeutic agent, and thus a more streamlined development and regulatory path compared with combination products. In a mouse model of exudative AMD, ABBV642 was observed to be more effective than aflibercept. ABBV642 has potential to improve efficacy with reduced injection frequency in patients with exudative AMD, thereby reducing the enormous disease burden for patients and society.
To assess the prevalence of subretinal drusenoid deposits (SDD) in older adults with healthy maculas and early and intermediate age-related macular degeneration (AMD) using multimodal imaging.
Cross-sectional study.
A total of 651 subjects aged ≥60 years enrolled in the Alabama Study of Early Age-Related Macular Degeneration from primary care ophthalmology clinics.
Subjects were imaged using spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD OCT) of the macula and optic nerve head (ONH), infrared reflectance, fundus autofluorescence, and color fundus photographs (CFP). Eyes were assessed for AMD presence and severity using the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) 9-step scale. Criteria for SDD presence were identification on ≥1 en face modality plus SD OCT or on ≥2 en face modalities if absent on SD OCT. Subretinal drusenoid deposits were considered present at the person level if present in 1 or both eyes.
Prevalence of SDD in participants with and without AMD.
Overall prevalence of SDD was 32% (197/611), with 62% (122/197) affected in both eyes. Persons with SDD were older than those without SDD (70.6 vs. 68.7 years, P = 0.0002). Prevalence of SDD was 23% in subjects without AMD and 52% in subjects with AMD (P < 0.0001). Among those with early and intermediate AMD, SDD prevalence was 49% and 79%, respectively. After age adjustment, those with SDD were 3.4 times more likely to have AMD than those without SDD (95% confidence interval, 2.3-4.9). By using CFP only for SDD detection per the AREDS protocol, prevalence of SDD was 2% (12/610). Of persons with SDD detected by SD OCT and confirmed by at least 1 en face modality, 47% (89/190) were detected exclusively on the ONH SD OCT volume.
Subretinal drusenoid deposits are present in approximately one quarter of older adults with healthy maculae and in more than half of persons with early to intermediate AMD, even by stringent criteria. The prevalence of SDD is strongly associated with AMD presence and severity and increases with age, and its retinal topography including peripapillary involvement resembles that of rod photoreceptors. Consensus on SDD detection methods is recommended to advance our knowledge of this lesion and its clinical and biologic significance.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of blindness in ageing societies, triggered by both environmental and genetic factors. The strongest genetic signal for AMD with odds ratios of up to 2.8 per adverse allele was found previously over a chromosomal region in 10q26 harboring two genes, ARMS2 and HTRA1, although with little knowledge as to which gene or genetic variation is functionally relevant to AMD pathology. In this study, we analyzed rare recombinant haplotypes in 16,144 AMD cases and 17,832 controls from the International AMD Genomics Consortium and identified variants in ARMS2 but not HTRA1 to exclusively carry the AMD risk with P-values between 1.0 × 10<sup>-773</sup> and 6.7 × 10<sup>-5</sup> This now allows prioritization of the gene of interest for subsequent functional studies.
Subsequent malignant neoplasms (SMNs) are associated with significant morbidity and are a major cause of premature mortality among cancer survivors. Several large studies have demonstrated a strong association between the radiation and/or chemotherapy used to treat primary cancer and the risk of developing SMNs. However, for any given therapeutic exposure, the risk of developing an SMN varies between individuals. Genomic variation can potentially modify the association between therapeutic exposures and SMN risk and may explain the observed interindividual variability. In this review, the author provides a brief overview of the current knowledge regarding the role of genomic variation in the development of therapy-related SMNs and discusses the methodological challenges in undertaking an endeavor to develop a deeper understanding of the molecular underpinnings of therapy-related SMNs, such as an appropriate study design, the identification of an adequately sized study population together with a reliable plan for collecting and maintaining high-quality DNA, clinical validation of the phenotype, and the selection of an appropriate approach or platform for genotyping. Understanding the factors that can modify the risk of treatment-related SMNs is critical to developing targeted intervention strategies and optimizing risk-based health care for cancer survivors.
<b>Purpose:</b> Second malignant neoplasms (SMNs) are severe late complications that occur in pediatric cancer survivors exposed to radiotherapy and other genotoxic treatments. To characterize the mutational landscape of treatment-induced sarcomas and to identify candidate SMN-predisposing variants, we analyzed germline and SMN samples from pediatric cancer survivors.<b>Experimental Design:</b> We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) and RNA sequencing on radiation-induced sarcomas arising from two pediatric cancer survivors. To assess the frequency of germline <i>TP53</i> variants in SMNs, Sanger sequencing was performed to analyze germline <i>TP53</i> in 37 pediatric cancer survivors from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study (CCSS) without any history of a familial cancer predisposition syndrome but known to have developed SMNs.<b>Results:</b> WES revealed <i>TP53</i> mutations involving p53's DNA-binding domain in both index cases, one of which was also present in the germline. The germline and somatic <i>TP53-</i>mutant variants were enriched in the transcriptomes for both sarcomas. Analysis of <i>TP53-</i>coding exons in germline specimens from the CCSS survivor cohort identified a G215C variant encoding an R72P amino acid substitution in 6 patients and a synonymous SNP A639G in 4 others, resulting in 10 of 37 evaluable patients (27%) harboring a germline <i>TP53</i> variant.<b>Conclusions:</b> Currently, germline <i>TP53</i> is not routinely assessed in patients with pediatric cancer. These data support the concept that identifying germline <i>TP53</i> variants at the time a primary cancer is diagnosed may identify patients at high risk for SMN development, who could benefit from modified therapeutic strategies and/or intensive posttreatment monitoring. <i>Clin Cancer Res; 23(7); 1852-61. ©2016 AACR</i>.
Holocaust survivors during World War II were exposed to various factors that are associated with cancer risk. The objective of this study was to determine whether Holocaust survivors had an increased risk for developing cancer.
The study population included 152,622 survivors. The main analysis was based on a comparison between individuals who were entitled to compensation for suffering persecution during the war and individuals who were denied such compensation. A complementary analysis compared survivors who were born in countries governed by Nazi Germany with survivors born in nonoccupied countries. A Cox proportional hazards model was used, with the time at risk of cancer development starting on either January 1, 1960, or the date of immigration to the date of cancer diagnosis or death or the date of last follow-up (December 31, 2006).
Cancer was diagnosed in 22.2% of those who were granted compensation versus 16% of those who were denied compensation (P < .0001). Adjusting for birth cohort, sex, country of origin, and period of immigration, both analyses revealed significant increased risks of developing cancer in those who were exposed. For those who were granted versus denied compensation, the hazard ratios were 1.06 (P < .001) for all sites, 1.12 (P = .07) for colorectal cancer, and 1.37 (P = .008) for lung cancer. For those born in occupied countries versus nonoccupied countries, the hazard ratios were 1.08 (P < .001), 1.08 (P = .003), and 1.12 (P = .02), respectively.
The current results, based on a large cohort of Holocaust survivors who were exposed to a variety of severe deprivations, add to the conflicting and sparse knowledge on this issue and support the notion that this group has a small but consistent increase in cancer development. Cancer 2017;123:3335-45. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Cancer incidence rates and trends for cases diagnosed through 2014 using data reported to the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program in February 2016 and a validation of rates and trends for cases diagnosed through 2013 and submitted in February 2015 using the November 2015 submission are reported. New cancer sites include the pancreas, kidney and renal pelvis, corpus and uterus, and childhood cancer sites for ages birth to 19 years inclusive.
A new reporting delay model is presented for these estimates for more consistent results with the model used for the usual November SEER submissions, adjusting for the large case undercount in the February submission. Joinpoint regression methodology was used to assess trends. Delay-adjusted rates and trends were checked for validity between the February 2016 and November 2016 submissions.
Validation revealed that the delay model provides similar estimates of eventual counts using either February or November submission data. Trends declined through 2014 for prostate and colon and rectum cancer for males and females, male and female lung cancer, and cervical cancer. Thyroid cancer and liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancer increased. Pancreas (male and female) and corpus and uterus cancer demonstrated a modest increase. Slight increases occurred for male kidney and renal pelvis, and for all childhood cancer sites for ages birth to 19 years.
Evaluating early cancer data submissions, adjusted for reporting delay, produces timely and valid incidence rates and trends. The results of the current study support using delay-adjusted February submission data for valid incidence rate and trend estimates over several data cycles. Cancer 2017;123:2524-34. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
The authors describe the incidence and characteristics of secondary malignant neoplasms (SMNs) in adolescent and young adult (AYA) cancer survivors compared with those in younger and older cancer survivors.
Children aged ≤ 14 years, AYAs aged 15 to 39, and older adults aged ≥ 40 years at the time of primary diagnosis who were reported as cancer survivors in the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program between 1973 and 2011 were compared in this population-based analysis. The primary analysis was the risk that an SMN would occur ≥ 5 years after the original diagnosis for patients who had the more common AYA cancers (leukemia, lymphoma, testicular malignancy, ovarian malignancy, melanoma, and cancers of the thyroid, breast, soft tissue, or bone). The standardized incidence ratio (SIR), absolute excess risk (AER), and cumulative incidence of SMN for the selected cancers were assessed. The risk of SMN for the entire cohort also was analyzed.
Of the 148,558 AYA survivors who were diagnosed with a selected cancer, 7384 developed an SMN 5 years after their original diagnosis. The SIRs (95% confidence intervals [CIs]) were 1.58 (95% CI, 1.55-1.62) for AYAs, 4.26 (95% CI, 3.77-4.80) for children, and 1.10 (95% CI, 1.09-1.11) for older adults, and the AERs were 22.9, 16.6, and 14.7, respectively. The cumulative incidence of SMN at 30 years was 13.9% for the AYA group. The most common SMNs in AYAs were breast cancer, gastrointestinal cancer, genital cancers, and melanoma. AYAs who had received radiation therapy had a higher cumulative incidence of SMN.
AYAs who survive cancer for more than 5 years have a higher relative risk of SMN compared with the general population and have a higher absolute risk of SMN compared with younger or older cancer survivors.
Multiple primary neoplasms (MPNs) are rare. Most MPNs are double, and triple primary neoplasms are extremely rarer. Here, we describe a case of a 66-year-old man diagnosed with metachronous triple primary neoplasms with primary prostate cancer, lung cancer and colon cancer.
The patient complained of dysuria in January 2015, and he underwent transurethral resection of the prostate. The pathological results showed acinar adenocarcinoma of prostate with a Gleason score of 3+3. In January 2017, he complained of lower abdominal pain, then he took an enteroscopy examination, found a mass in the sigmoid colon, and positron emission tomography/computed tomography examination showed masses in the sigmoid colon and right upper lobe of the lung. Biopsy of the colon showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog exon 2 mutation, and biopsy of the lung showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with epidermal rowth factor receptor exon 21 mutation.
Metachronous triple primary neoplasms with primary prostate cancer, lung cancer and colon cancer.
The patient underwent surgical resection of the right upper lobe of the lung, postoperative stage was T1bN0M0 (stage IA). After 8 cycles of chemotherapy with modified FOLFOX6 regimen (oxaliplatin 85 mg/m, leucovorin 400 mg/m, 5-fluorouracil 400 mg/m on day 1, followed by 5-fluorouracil 2400 mg/m intravenous infusion over 46 hours every 2 weeks), the patient underwent radical resection of colon cancer, and he finished the remaining 4 cycles of modified FOLFOX6 regimen chemotherapy in November 2017.
The patient takes examination every three months, and the results show no recurrence.
When considering MPNs, thorough surveillance by new screening methods is required to detect a second or even third neoplasm at an early stage.
Sub-Saharan African-born blacks (ABs) are one of the fastest-growing populations in the United States. However, to the authors' knowledge, data regarding the cancer burden in this group are lacking, which would inform targeted cancer prevention and control.
The authors calculated age-standardized proportional incidence ratios (PIRs) comparing the frequency of the top 15 cancers in ABs with that of US-born non-Hispanic blacks (USBs) by sex and region of birth using incidence data for 2000 through 2012 from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER 17) program.
Compared with USBs, ABs had significantly higher PIRs of infection-related cancers (liver, stomach, and Kaposi sarcoma), blood cancers (leukemia and non-Hodgkin lymphoma), prostate cancer, and thyroid cancers (females only). For example, the PIR for Kaposi sarcoma in AB versus USB women was 12.06 (95% confidence interval [95% CI], 5.23-18.90). In contrast, ABs had lower PIRs for smoking-related and colorectal cancers (eg, for lung cancer among men, the PIR was 0.30 [95% CI, 0.27-0.34]). Furthermore, cancer occurrence in ABs versus USBs varied by region of birth. For example, the higher PIRs for liver cancer noted among male ABs (PIR, 3.57; 95% CI, 1.79-5.35) and for thyroid cancer in female ABs (PIR, 3.03; 95% CI, 2.03-4.02) were confined to Eastern African-born blacks, whereas the higher PIR for prostate cancer (PIR, 1.90; 95% CI, 1.78, 2.02) was confined to Western African-born blacks.
The cancer incidence profile of ABs is different from that of USBs and varies by region of birth, suggesting differences in environmental, cultural, social, and genetic factors. The findings of the current study could stimulate etiologic research and help to inform targeted interventions. Cancer 2017;123:3116-24. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Unlike Medicare, the Veterans Health Administration (VA) health care system does not require veterans with cancer to make the "terrible choice" between receipt of hospice services or disease-modifying chemotherapy/radiation therapy. For this report, the authors characterized the VA's provision of concurrent care, defined as days in the last 6 months of life during which veterans simultaneously received hospice services and chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
This retrospective cohort study included veteran decedents with cancer during 2006 through 2012 who were identified from claims with cancer diagnoses. Hospice and cancer treatment were identified using VA and Medicare administrative data. Descriptive statistics were used to characterize the changes in concurrent care, hospice, palliative care, and chemotherapy or radiation treatment.
The proportion of veterans receiving chemotherapy or radiation therapy remained stable at approximately 45%, whereas the proportion of veterans who received hospice increased from 55% to 68%. The receipt of concurrent care also increased during this time from 16.2% to 24.5%. The median time between hospice initiation and death remained stable at around 21 days. Among veterans who received chemotherapy or radiation therapy in their last 6 months of life, the median time between treatment termination and death ranged from 35 to 40 days. There was considerable variation between VA medical centers in the use of concurrent care (interquartile range, 16%-34% in 2012).
Concurrent receipt of hospice and chemotherapy or radiation therapy increased among veterans dying from cancer without reductions in the receipt of cancer therapy. This approach reflects the expansion of hospice services in the VA with VA policy allowing the concurrent receipt of hospice and antineoplastic therapies. Cancer 2016;122:782-790. © 2015 American Cancer Society.
Current national cancer screening recommendations include the potential risk of psychological harm related to screening. However, data on the relation of psychological distress to cancer screening is limited. The authors conducted a systematic review to assess psychological distress associated with cancer screening procedures.
Studies that administered measures of psychological distress between 2 weeks before and 1 month after the screening procedure were included.
In total, 22 eligible studies met criteria for review, including 13 observational trials and 9 randomized controlled trials. Eligible studies used a broad range of validated and unvalidated measures. Anxiety was the most commonly assessed construct and was measured using the State Trait Anxiety Inventory. Studies included breast, colorectal, prostate, lung, and cervical screening procedures. Distress was low across procedures, with the exception of colorectal screening. Distress did not vary according to the time at which distress was measured. None of the studies were conducted exclusively with the intention of assessing distress at the time of screening.
Evidence of low distress during the time of cancer screening suggests that distress might not be a widespread barrier to screening among adults who undergo screening. However, more studies are needed using validated measures of distress to further understand the extent to which screening may elicit psychological distress and impede adherence to national screening recommendations. Cancer 2017;123:3882-94. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
The survival of children with cancer has improved dramatically in the last decades. Survivors of childhood cancer are at increased risk of long-term complications of therapeutic exposure. Second malignant neoplasms are one of the most severe side effects of cancer treatment. The frequency and type of secondary cancers may vary depending on the initial diagnosis, treatment administered and genetic predisposition. This review highlights the risk factors in the development of SMNs in survivors of pediatric cancers and their differences according to primary cancer type, genetic predisposition and treatment admistered. Finally, the review emphasizes the need for life-time follow-up of survivors of childhood cancer for the development of second malignancies.
Improved survival for individuals with metastatic cancer accentuates the importance of employment for cancer survivors. A better understanding of how metastatic cancer affects employment is a necessary step toward the development of tools for assisting survivors in this important realm.
The ECOG-ACRIN Symptom Outcomes and Practice Patterns study was analyzed to investigate what factors were associated with the employment of 680 metastatic cancer patients. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses were conducted to compare patients stably working with patients no longer working.
There were 668 metastatic working-age participants in the analysis: 236 (35%) worked full- or part-time, whereas 302 (45%) had stopped working because of illness. Overall, 58% reported some change in employment due to illness. A better performance status and non-Hispanic white ethnicity/race were significantly associated with continuing to work despite a metastatic cancer diagnosis in the multivariate analysis. The disease type, time since metastatic diagnosis, number of metastatic sites, location of metastatic disease, and treatment status had no significant impact. Among the potentially modifiable factors, receiving hormonal treatment (if a viable option) and decreasing symptom interference were associated with continuing to work.
A significant percentage of the metastatic patients remained employed; increased symptom burden was associated with a change to no longer working. Modifiable factors resulting in work interference should be minimized so that patients with metastatic disease may continue working if this is desired. Improvements in symptom control and strategies developed to help address workplace difficulties have promise for improving this aspect of survivorship.
We examined the risk factors and prognostic factors for synchronous esophageal neoplasia (SEN) by comparing the characteristics of hypopharyngeal cancer (HPC) patients with and without SEN.
We examined 183 patients who were treated with definitive radiotherapy for HPC. Lugol chromoendoscopy screening of the esophagus was performed in all patients before chemoradiotherapy.
Thirty-six patients had SEN, 49 patients died of HPC and two died of esophageal cancer. The patients with SEN exhibited significantly higher alcohol consumption than those without SEN (P = 0.018). The 5-year overall survival (OS) rate of the 36 patients with SEN was lower than that of the other patients (36.2% vs 63.4%, P = 0.006). The SEN patients exhibited significantly shorter HPC cause-specific survival than the other patients (P = 0.039). Both the OS (P = 0.005) and the HPC cause-specific survival (P = 0.026) of the patients with SEN were significantly shorter than those of the patients without SEN in multivariate analysis. Category 4/T1 stage esophageal cancer was treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CCRT), endoscopic treatment or chemotherapy. The 5-year survival rates for esophageal cancer recurrence for CCRT, endoscopic treatment and chemotherapy were 71.5, 43.7 and 0%, respectively. The median (range) survival time (months) of CCRT, endoscopic treatment and chemotherapy was 22.7 (7.5-90.6), 46.44 (17.3-136.7) and 7.98 (3.72-22.8), respectively.
Advanced HPC patients with SEN might have a poorer prognosis than those without SEN even when the esophageal cancer is detected early and managed appropriately.
Growth hormone deficiency (GHD) is the most common endocrine late effect observed in childhood cancer survivors (CCS) previously submitted to cranial irradiation. Radiation therapy can also increase the risk of second neoplasms (SNs). Since in previous studies GH replacement therapy was associated with increased incidence of neoplasia, we explored the association between SNs and GH replacement therapy in a cohort of CCS with GHD.
Within the clinical cohort of CCS referred to the Transition Unit for Childhood Cancer Survivors of Turin between November 2001 and December 2012, we considered all patients who developed GHD as a consequence of cancer therapies. GHD was always diagnosed in childhood. To evaluate the quality of data, our cohort was linked to the Childhood Cancer Registry of Piedmont.
GHD was diagnosed in 49 out of 310 CCS included in our clinical cohort. At least one SN was diagnosed in 14 patients, meningioma and basal cell carcinoma being the most common SNs. The cumulative incidence of SNs was similar in GH-treated and -untreated patients (8 SNs out of 26 GH-treated and 6 out of 23 GH-untreated patients; p = 0.331). Age, sex and paediatric cancer type had no impact on SNs development.
In our CCS, GH replacement therapy does not seem to increase the risk of SNs. Anyway, independently from replacement therapy, in these patients we observed an elevated risk of SNs, possibly related to previous radiation therapy, which suggests the need of a close long-term follow-up.
The Oregon Medicaid lottery provided a unique opportunity to assess the causal impacts of health insurance on cancer screening rates within the framework of a randomized controlled trial. Prior studies regarding the impacts of health insurance have almost always been limited to observational evidence, which cannot be used to make causal inferences.
The authors prospectively followed a representative panel of 16,204 individuals from the Oregon Medicaid lottery reservation list, collecting data before and after the Medicaid lottery drawings. The study panel was divided into 2 groups: a treatment group of individuals who were selected in the Medicaid lottery (6254 individuals) and a control group who were not (9950 individuals). The authors also created an elevated risk subpanel based on family cancer histories. One year after the lottery drawings, differences in cancer screening rates, preventive behaviors, and health status were compared between the study groups.
Medicaid coverage resulted in significantly higher rates of several common cancer screenings, especially among women, as well as better primary care connections and self-reported health outcomes. There was little evidence found that acquiring Medicaid increased the adoption of preventive health behaviors that might reduce cancer risk.
Medicaid coverage did not appear to directly impact lifestyle choices that might reduce cancer risk, but it did provide access to important care and screenings that could help to detect cancers earlier. These findings could have long-term population health implications for states considering or pursuing Medicaid expansion. Cancer 2016;122:791-797. © 2015 American Cancer Society.
Purpose Childhood cancer survivors (CCSs) are at increased risk for subsequent malignant neoplasms (SMNs). We evaluated the long-term risk of SMNs in a well-characterized cohort of 5-year CCSs, with a particular focus on individual chemotherapeutic agents and solid cancer risk. Methods The Dutch Childhood Cancer Oncology Group-Long-Term Effects After Childhood Cancer cohort includes 6,165 5-year CCSs diagnosed between 1963 and 2001 in the Netherlands. SMNs were identified by linkages with the Netherlands Cancer Registry, the Dutch Pathology Registry, and medical chart review. We calculated standardized incidence ratios, excess absolute risks, and cumulative incidences. Multivariable Cox proportional hazard regression analyses were used to evaluate treatment-associated risks for breast cancer, sarcoma, and all solid cancers. Results After a median follow-up of 20.7 years (range, 5.0 to 49.8 years) since first diagnosis, 291 SMNs were ascertained in 261 CCSs (standardized incidence ratio, 5.2; 95% CI, 4.6 to 5.8; excess absolute risk, 20.3/10,000 person-years). Cumulative SMN incidence at 25 years after first diagnosis was 3.9% (95% CI, 3.4% to 4.6%) and did not change noticeably among CCSs treated in the 1990s compared with those treated earlier. We found dose-dependent doxorubicin-related increased risks of all solid cancers ( P<sub>trend</sub> < .001) and breast cancer ( P<sub>trend</sub> < .001). The doxorubicin-breast cancer dose response was stronger in survivors of Li-Fraumeni syndrome-associated childhood cancers (leukemia, CNS, and non-Ewing sarcoma) versus survivors of other cancers ( P<sub>difference</sub> = .008). In addition, cyclophosphamide was found to increase sarcoma risk in a dose-dependent manner ( P<sub>trend</sub> = .01). Conclusion The results strongly suggest that doxorubicin exposure in CCSs increases the risk of subsequent solid cancers and breast cancer, whereas cyclophosphamide exposure increases the risk of subsequent sarcomas. These results may inform future childhood cancer treatment protocols and SMN surveillance guidelines for CCSs.
Lower gastrointestinal (GI) neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) of the colon and rectum are uncommon and not traditionally associated with hereditary GI cancer syndromes. However, with widespread implementation of colorectal cancer screening programs, lower GI NENs are being identified with increasing frequency. We report the first case series of six patients with lower GI NENs who were diagnosed with hereditary GI cancer syndromes by germline testing. Two patients presented with poorly differentiated rectal neuroendocrine carcinoma (NECs) with colonic polyposis and were found to have Familial Adenomatous Polyposis and MYH-Associated Polyposis, respectively. Three patients with colorectal NENs (one well differentiated neuroendocrine tumor, NET, and two NECs), all of which displayed abnormal immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair proteins, were diagnosed with Lynch syndrome. One patient with a goblet cell carcinoid was diagnosed with CHEK2 mutations. All patients met genetic testing guidelines and the diagnosis was made utilizing next generation sequencing gene panel tests. Lower GI NETs should therefore be considered a potential hereditary GI cancer syndrome-associated malignancy in patients who otherwise meet criteria for genetic evaluation.
Although the increased incidence of second primary malignant neoplasms (SPMs) is a well-known late effect after cancer, few studies have compared survival after an SPM to survival of the same cancer occurring as first primary malignant neoplasm (PM) by age.
To assess the survival impact of SPMs in adolescents and young adults (AYAs) (15-39 years) compared with that of pediatric (<15 years) and older adult (≥40 years) patients with the same SPMs.
This was a population-based, retrospective cohort study of patients with cancer in 13 Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results regions in the United States diagnosed from 1992 to 2008 and followed through 2013. Data analysis was performed between June 2016 and January 2017.
Five-year relative survival was calculated overall and for each cancer occurring as a PM or SPM by age at diagnosis. The impact of SPM status on cancer-specific death was examined using multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression.
A total of 15 954 pediatric, 125 750 AYAs, and 878 370 older adult patients diagnosed as having 14 cancers occurring as a PM or SPM were included. Overall, 5-year survival after an SPM was 33.1% lower for children, 20.2% lower for AYAs, and 8.3% lower for older adults compared with a PM at the same age. For the most common SPMs in AYAs, the absolute difference in 5-year survival was 42% lower for secondary non-Hodgkin lymphoma, 19% for secondary breast carcinoma, 15% for secondary thyroid carcinoma, and 13% for secondary soft-tissue sarcoma. Survival by SPM status was significantly worse in younger vs older patients for thyroid, Hodgkin lymphoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, acute myeloid leukemia, soft-tissue sarcoma, and central nervous system cancer. Adolescents and young adults with secondary Hodgkin lymphoma (hazard ratio [95% CI], 3.5 [1.7-7.1]); soft-tissue sarcoma (2.8 [2.1-3.9]); breast carcinoma (2.1 [1.8-2.4]); acute myeloid leukemia (1.9 [1.5-2.4]); and central nervous system cancer (1.8 [1.2-2.8]) experienced worse survival compared with AYAs with the same PMs.
The adverse impact of SPMs on survival is substantial for AYAs and may partially explain the relative lack of survival improvement in AYAs compared with other age groups. The impact of a particular SPM diagnosis on survival may inform age-specific prevention, screening, treatment, and survivorship recommendations.
Individual environmental exposures are associated with cancer development; however, environmental exposures occur simultaneously. The Environmental Quality Index (EQI) is a county-level measure of cumulative environmental exposures that occur in 5 domains.
The EQI was linked to county-level annual age-adjusted cancer incidence rates from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program state cancer profiles. All-site cancer and the top 3 site-specific cancers for male and female subjects were considered. Incident rate differences (IRDs; annual rate difference per 100,000 persons) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using fixed-slope, random intercept multilevel linear regression models. Associations were assessed with domain-specific indices and analyses were stratified by rural/urban status.
Comparing the highest quintile/poorest environmental quality with the lowest quintile/best environmental quality for overall EQI, all-site county-level cancer incidence rate was positively associated with poor environmental quality overall (IRD, 38.55; 95% CI, 29.57-47.53) and for male (IRD, 32.60; 95% CI, 16.28-48.91) and female (IRD, 30.34; 95% CI, 20.47-40.21) subjects, indicating a potential increase in cancer incidence with decreasing environmental quality. Rural/urban stratified models demonstrated positive associations comparing the highest with the lowest quintiles for all strata, except the thinly populated/rural stratum and in the metropolitan/urbanized stratum. Prostate and breast cancer demonstrated the strongest positive associations with poor environmental quality.
We observed strong positive associations between the EQI and all-site cancer incidence rates, and associations differed by rural/urban status and environmental domain. Research focusing on single environmental exposures in cancer development may not address the broader environmental context in which cancers develop, and future research should address cumulative environmental exposures. Cancer 2017;123:2901-8. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Although studies of metastasectomy have been limited primarily to institutional experiences, reports of favorable long-term outcomes have generated increasing interest. In the current study, the authors attempted to define the national practice patterns in metastasectomy for 4 common malignancies with varying responsiveness to systemic therapy.
The National (Nationwide) Inpatient Sample was used to estimate the national incidence of metastasectomy for colorectal cancer, lung cancer, breast cancer, and melanoma from 2000 through 2011. Incidence-adjusted rates were determined for liver, lung, brain, small bowel, and adrenal metastasectomies. The average annual percentage change (AAPC) in metastasectomy by cancer type was calculated using joinpoint regression.
Colorectal cancer was the most common indication for metastasectomy (87,407 cases; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 86,307-88,507 cases) followed by lung cancer (58,245 cases; 95% CI, 57,453-59,036 cases), breast cancer (26,271 cases; 95% CI, 25,672-26,870 cases), and melanoma (20,298 cases; 95% CI, 19,897-20,699 cases). Metastasectomy increased significantly for all cancer types over the study period: colorectal cancer (AAPC, 6.83; 95% CI, 5.7-7.9), lung cancer (AAPC, 5.8; 95% CI, 5.1-6.4), breast cancer (AAPC, 5.5; 95% CI, 3.7-7.3), and melanoma (AAPC, 4.03; 95% CI, 2.1-6.0). Despite an increasing number of comorbidities in patients undergoing metastasectomy (P<.05 for each cancer type), inpatient mortality rates after metastasectomy fell for all cancer types, most significantly for colorectal (AAPC, -5.49; 95% CI, -8.2 to -2.7) and lung (AAPC, -6.2; 95% CI, -11.7 to -0.3) cancers. The increasing performance of metastasectomy was largely driven by high-volume institutions, in which patients had a lower mean number of comorbidities (P<.01 for all cancer types) and lower inpatient mortality (P<.01 for all cancers except melanoma).
From 2000 through 2011, the performance of metastasectomy increased substantially across common cancer types, notwithstanding various advances in systemic therapies. Metastasectomy was performed more safely, despite increasing patient comorbidity. High-volume institutions appeared to drive practice patterns.
Programmed death 1 (PD-1) signaling in the tumor microenvironment dampens immune responses to cancer, and blocking this axis induces antitumor effects in several malignancies. Clinical studies of PD-1 blockade are only now being initiated in pediatric patients, and little is known regarding programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in common childhood cancers. The authors characterized PD-L1 expression and tumor-associated immune cells (TAICs) (lymphocytes and macrophages) in common pediatric cancers.
Whole slide sections and tissue microarrays were evaluated by immunohistochemistry for PD-L1 expression and for the presence of TAICs. TAICs were also screened for PD-L1 expression.
Thirty-nine of 451 evaluable tumors (9%) expressed PD-L1 in at least 1% of tumor cells. The highest frequency histotypes comprised Burkitt lymphoma (80%; 8 of 10 tumors), glioblastoma multiforme (36%; 5 of 14 tumors), and neuroblastoma (14%; 17 of 118 tumors). PD-L1 staining was associated with inferior survival among patients with neuroblastoma (P = .004). Seventy-four percent of tumors contained lymphocytes and/or macrophages. Macrophages were significantly more likely to be identified in PD-L1-positive versus PD-L1-negative tumors (P < .001).
A subset of diagnostic pediatric cancers exhibit PD-L1 expression, whereas a much larger fraction demonstrates infiltration with tumor-associated lymphocytes. PD-L1 expression may be a biomarker for poor outcome in neuroblastoma. Further preclinical and clinical investigation will define the predictive nature of PD-L1 expression in childhood cancers both at diagnosis and after exposure to chemoradiotherapy. Cancer 2017;123:3807-3815. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
American Indians/Alaskan Natives (AI/ANs) have the worst 5-year cancer survival of all racial/ethnic groups in the United States. Causes for this disparity are unknown. The authors of this report examined the receipt of cancer treatment among AI/AN patients compared with white patients.
This was a retrospective cohort study of 338,204 patients who were diagnosed at age ≥65 years with breast, colon, lung, or prostate cancer between 1996 and 2005 in the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results-Medicare database. Nationally accepted guidelines for surgical and adjuvant therapy and surveillance were selected as metrics of optimal, guideline-concordant care. Treatment analyses compared AI/ANs with matched whites.
Across cancer types, AI/ANs were less likely to receive optimal cancer treatment and were less likely to undergo surgery (P ≤ .025 for all cancers). Adjuvant therapy rates were significantly lower for AI/AN patients with breast cancer (P < .001) and colon cancer (P = .001). Rates of post-treatment surveillance also were lower among AI/ANs and were statistically significantly lower for AI/AN patients with breast cancer (P = .002) and prostate cancer (P < .001). Nonreceipt of optimal cancer treatment was associated with significantly worse survival across cancer types. Disease-specific survival for those who did not undergo surgery was significantly lower for patients with breast cancer (hazard ratio [HR], 0.62), colon cancer (HR, 0.74), prostate cancer (HR, 0.52), and lung cancer (HR, 0.36). Survival rates also were significantly lower for those patients who did not receive adjuvant therapy for breast cancer (HR, 0.56), colon cancer (HR, 0.59), or prostate cancer (HR, 0.81; all 95% confidence intervals were <1.0).
Fewer AI/AN patients than white patients received guideline-concordant cancer treatment across the 4 most common cancers. Efforts to explain these differences are critical to improving cancer care and survival for AI/AN patients.
Several studies have reported an increased incidence of coexistent cancer in patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), and myelosuppressive treatment has been speculated to be one of the causes. In this study, we have concentrated on malignancies diagnosed before the MPN diagnosis to eliminate the possible influence of MPN treatment. The patients were recruited from the Swedish and Norwegian cancer registries. One thousand seven hundred and 45 patients from the Swedish MPN Quality Registry and 468 patients from the Norwegian National Cancer Registry were included in this study covering a 3-yr period. The results show that primary concurrent cancer is higher among patients with MPN compared to the general population. When pooled together, the Swedish and the Norwegian cohort showed increased prevalence of all types of cancer in general compared with the general population, standard prevalence ratio (SPR) of 1.20 (95% CI 1.07-1.34). Significantly high SPRs were reached for skin malignant melanoma [1.89 (95% CI 1.33-2.62)], prostate cancer [1.39 (95% CI 1.11-1.71)], and hematologic cancer [1.49 (95% CI 1.00-2.12)]. In the polycythemia vera group, the risk of having prior malignant melanoma of the skin was significant, with an SPR of 2.20 (95% CI 1.17-3.77). For patients with essential thrombocythemia and primary myelofibrosis, no significant risks were found. Coexisting cancers have a high impact on the treatment strategies of MPN, as it narrows down the treatment options. Chronic inflammation, as a common denominator of MPN with other cancers, can catalyze each other's existence and progression. 
The survivorship needs of patients living with chronic cancer (CC) and their use of survivorship care plans (SCPs) have been overlooked and underappreciated.
A convenience sample of 39,088 SCPs completed for cancer survivors with an Internet-based SCP tool was examined; it included 5847 CC survivors (15%; CC was defined as chronic leukemia and/or recurrent/metastatic cancer of another nature). Patient-reported treatment effects and follow-up care patterns were compared between CC survivors and survivors treated with curative intent (CI). Responses from a follow-up survey regarding SCP satisfaction and use were reviewed.
CC survivors had greater odds of experiencing multiple treatment-related effects than survivors treated with CI; these effects included fatigue, cognitive changes, dyspnea, peripheral neuropathy, lymphedema, and erectile dysfunction. Nearly half of CC survivors were managed by an oncologist alone, and they were less likely than CI patients to be comanaged by a primary care provider and an oncologist. Fewer SCPs were generated by health care providers (HCPs) for CC survivors versus CI survivors. A smaller proportion of CC users versus CI users rated their experience and satisfaction with the SCP tool as very good or excellent, and CC users were less likely to share the HCP summary with their health care team.
A substantial number of CC survivors, often considered incurable but treatable, seek survivorship support. Tools to facilitate participation, communication, and coordination of care are valuable for these patients, and future iterations of SCPs should be designed to address the particular circumstances of living with CC. Cancer 2017;123:4268-4276. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes greater than 5% of cancers worldwide, including all cervical cancers and an alarmingly increasing proportion of oropharyngeal cancers (OPCs). Despite markedly reduced cervical cancer incidence in industrialized nations with organized screening programs, cervical cancer remains the second most common cause of death from cancer in women worldwide, as developing countries lack resources for universal, high-quality screening. In the United States, HPV-related OPC is only 1 of 5 cancers with a rising incidence since 1975 and now has taken over the cervix as the most common site of HPV-related cancer. Similar trends follow throughout North America and Europe. The need for early detection and prevention is paramount. Despite the common etiologic role of HPV in the development of cervical cancer and HPV-associated OPC, great disparity exists between incidence, screening modalities (or lack thereof), treatment, and prevention in these 2 very distinct cohorts. These differences in cervical cancer and HPV-associated OPC and their impact are discussed here. Cancer 2017;123:2219-2229. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
The American Cancer Society (ACS), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the National Cancer Institute (NCI), and the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries (NAACCR) collaborate annually to provide updates on cancer incidence and death rates and trends in these outcomes for the United States. This year's report includes the prevalence of comorbidity at the time of first cancer diagnosis among patients with lung, colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer and survival among cancer patients based on comorbidity level.
Data on cancer incidence were obtained from the NCI, the CDC, and the NAACCR; and data on mortality were obtained from the CDC. Long-term (1975/1992-2010) and short-term (2001-2010) trends in age-adjusted incidence and death rates for all cancers combined and for the leading cancers among men and women were examined by joinpoint analysis. Through linkage with Medicare claims, the prevalence of comorbidity among cancer patients who were diagnosed between 1992 through 2005 residing in 11 Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) areas were estimated and compared with the prevalence in a 5% random sample of cancer-free Medicare beneficiaries. Among cancer patients, survival and the probabilities of dying of their cancer and of other causes by comorbidity level, age, and stage were calculated.
Death rates continued to decline for all cancers combined for men and women of all major racial and ethnic groups and for most major cancer sites; rates for both sexes combined decreased by 1.5% per year from 2001 through 2010. Overall incidence rates decreased in men and stabilized in women. The prevalence of comorbidity was similar among cancer-free Medicare beneficiaries (31.8%), breast cancer patients (32.2%), and prostate cancer patients (30.5%); highest among lung cancer patients (52.9%); and intermediate among colorectal cancer patients (40.7%). Among all cancer patients and especially for patients diagnosed with local and regional disease, age and comorbidity level were important influences on the probability of dying of other causes and, consequently, on overall survival. For patients diagnosed with distant disease, the probability of dying of cancer was much higher than the probability of dying of other causes, and age and comorbidity had a smaller effect on overall survival.
Cancer death rates in the United States continue to decline. Estimates of survival that include the probability of dying of cancer and other causes stratified by comorbidity level, age, and stage can provide important information to facilitate treatment decisions.
Data on the incidence of adverse liver outcomes are limited for cancer patients with chronic (hepatitis B surface antigen [HBsAg]-positive/hepatitis B core antibody [anti-HBc]-positive) or past (HBsAg-negative/anti-HBc-positive) hepatitis B virus (HBV) after chemotherapy. This study was aimed at determining the impact of test timing and anti-HBV therapy on adverse liver outcomes in these patients.
Patients with solid or hematologic malignancies who received chemotherapy between 2004 and 2011 were retrospectively studied. HBV testing and anti-HBV therapy were defined as early at the initiation of cancer therapy and as late after initiation. Outcomes included hepatitis flares, hepatic impairment, liver failure, and death. Time-to-event analysis was used to determine incidence, and multivariate hazard models were used to determine predictors of outcomes.
There were 18,688 study patients (80.4% with solid tumors). The prevalence of chronic HBV was 1.1% (52 of 4905), and the prevalence of past HBV was 7.1% (350 of 4905). Among patients with solid tumors, late identification of chronic HBV was associated with a higher risk of hepatitis flare (hazard ratio [HR], 4.02; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.26-12.86), hepatic impairment (HR, 8.48; 95% CI, 1.86-38.66), liver failure (HR, 9.38; 95% CI, 1.50-58.86), and death (HR, 3.90; 95% CI, 1.19-12.83) in comparison with early identification. Among patients with hematologic malignancies and chronic HBV, the risk of death was 7.8 (95% CI, 1.73-35.27) times higher for persons with late initiation of anti-HBV therapy versus early initiation. Patients with late identification of chronic HBV had late or no anti-HBV therapy. Chronic HBV predicted liver failure in patients with solid or hematologic malignancies, whereas male sex and late identification were predictors for patients with solid tumors.
Early identification correlates with early anti-HBV therapy and reduces the risk of liver failure and death in chronic HBV patients receiving chemotherapy. Cancer 2017;123:3367-76. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Survivors of childhood cancer have an increased risk for subsequent neoplasms (SNs), but the incidence beyond the age of 40 years and associations with therapeutic exposures have not been well described.
Among 14,364 survivors of childhood cancer diagnosed between 1970 and 1986, 3,171 had an attained age of 40 years or older at the time of last contact. Cumulative incidence of SNs, standardized incidence ratios (SIRs), excess absolute risk of subsequent malignant neoplasms (SMNs), and relative risks (RRs) for SMNs and nonmelanoma skin cancers were calculated.
In total, 679 SNs were diagnosed in patients age 40 years or older. These included 196 SMNs, 419 nonmelanoma skin cancers, 21 nonmalignant meningiomas, and 43 other benign neoplasms. At age 55 years, the cumulative incidence of new SNs and SMNs occurring after age 40 years was 34.6% (95% CI, 28.7 to 40.6) and 16.3% (95% CI, 11.7 to 20.9), respectively. Survivors were twice as likely as the general population to receive a diagnosis of SMN after age 40 years (SIR, 2.2; 95% CI, 1.9 to 2.5). Among SMNs, risk was increased for breast cancer (SIR, 5.5; 95% CI, 4.5 to 6.7), renal cancer (SIR, 3.9; 95% CI, 2.0 to 7.5), soft tissue sarcoma (SIR, 2.6; 95% CI, 1.5 to 4.4), and thyroid cancer (SIR, 1.9; 95% CI, 1.0 to 3.5). Female sex (RR, 1.9; 95% CI, 1.3 to 2.6; P < .001) and therapeutic radiation exposure (RR, 2.2; 95% CI, 1.4 to 3.3; P < .001) were associated with an increased for risk for SMN in multivariable analysis.
Even after age 40 years, survivors of childhood cancer remain at increased risk for treatment-related SNs. These data suggest the need for life-long monitoring and should inform anticipatory guidance provided to survivors of childhood cancer.
In the current study, the authors attempted to describe the incidence, most common sites, and mortality of second primary malignancies among survivors of common cancers.
The authors identified patients aged ≥18 years who were diagnosed with a primary malignancy from the 10 most common cancer sites (prostate, breast, lung, colon, rectum, bladder, uterus, kidney, melanoma, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma) between 1992 and 2008 from Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data. Factors associated with the incidence of second primary malignancies were explored using bivariable and multivariable models, and mortality attributable to first and second primary malignancies was examined.
A cohort of 2,116,163 patients was identified, 170,865 of whom (8.1%) developed a second primary malignancy. Survivors of bladder cancer had the highest risk of developing a second cancer. In a multivariable model controlling for age, race, tumor grade, stage of disease, marital status, educational level, and income, a history of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (hazard ratios of 2.70 and 2.88, respectively, for men and women) and bladder cancer (hazard ratios of 1.88 and 1.66, respectively, for men and women) predicted the highest risk of developing a second cancer. For patients with 2 incident cancers, 13% died of their initial cancer, but greater than one-half (55%) died of their second primary malignancy. Lung cancer was the cause of death in 12% of patients with 2 incident cancers.
Nearly 1 in 12 patients diagnosed with a common cancer developed a second malignancy, the most common of which was lung cancer. Greater than one-half of patients with 2 incident cancers died of their secondary malignancy. The findings from the current study may inform care strategies among cancer survivors. Cancer 2016;122:3075-3086. © 2016 American Cancer Society.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common cancer predisposing syndromes with an incidence of 1 in 3,500 worldwide. Certain neoplasms or malignancies are over-represented in individuals with NF1; however, an increased risk of breast cancer has not been widely recognized or accepted. We identified 76 women with NF1 seen in the Henry Ford Health System (HFHS) from 1990 to 2009, and linked them to the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) registry covering the metropolitan Detroit area. Fifty-one women (67%) were under age 50 years at the time of data analysis. Six women developed invasive breast cancer before age 50, and three developed invasive breast cancer after age 50. Using standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) calculated based on the SEER age-adjusted invasive breast cancer incidence rates, our findings demonstrated a statistically significant increase of breast cancer incidence occurring in NF1 women (SIR = 5.2; 95% CI 2.4-9.8), and this relative increase was especially evident among those with breast cancer onset under age 50 (SIR = 8.8; 95% CI 3.2-19.2). These data are consistent with other reports suggesting an increase in breast cancer risk among females with NF1, which indicate that breast cancer screening guidelines should be evaluated for this potentially high-risk group.
The current study was performed to examine associations between childhood cancer therapies, chronic health conditions, and symptoms of emotional distress in adult survivors of childhood cancer.
Participants included 5021 adult survivors of childhood cancer (mean age, 32.0 years [standard deviation, 7.6 years] with a time since diagnosis of 23.2 years [standard deviation, 4.5 years]) who completed measures assessing symptoms of anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress. Cardiac, pulmonary, and endocrine conditions were graded using the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (version 4.03; grades 1-4). Structural equation modeling was used to examine hypothesized pathways between cancer treatment exposures, chronic health conditions, and symptoms of emotional distress. Multivariable models were used to estimate relative risks (RRs) for associations between chronic health conditions and distress.
Survivors with cardiovascular, endocrine, or pulmonary conditions were found to have a significantly higher prevalence of emotional distress symptoms. In path analyses and multivariable models, significant effects were observed between endocrine (β = .12 [P = .002] and RR, 1.3 [95% confidence interval (95% CI), 1.1-1.6]) and pulmonary (β = .13 [P<.001] and RR, 1.4 [95% CI, 1.1-1.7]) conditions and depression, and between cardiac (β = .13 [P = .001] and RR, 1.5 [95% CI, 1.2-1.8]) and pulmonary (β = .15 [P<.001] and RR, 1.6 [95% CI, 1.3-2.0]) conditions and anxiety. All treatment-related chronic health conditions were found to be associated with posttraumatic stress symptoms (cardiac: β = .09 [P = .004] and RR, 1.3 [95% CI, 1.2-1.5]; endocrine: β = .12 [P<.001] and RR, 1.3 [95% CI, 1.2-1.5]; and pulmonary: β = .13 [P<.001] and RR, 1.4 [95% CI, 1.2-1.6]).
Chronic health conditions resulting from childhood cancer therapies contribute to emotional distress in adult survivors. Targeted mental health screening efforts in this at-risk population appear warranted. Therapeutic approaches should consider the complex interplay between chronic health conditions and symptoms of emotional distress. Cancer 2017;123:521-528. © 2016 American Cancer Society.
Because cancer registry data provide a census of cancer cases, registry data can be used to: 1) define and monitor cancer incidence at the local, state, and national levels; 2) investigate patterns of cancer treatment; and 3) evaluate the effectiveness of public health efforts to prevent cancer cases and improve cancer survival. The purpose of this article is to provide a broad overview of the history of cancer surveillance programs in the United States, and illustrate the expanding ways in which cancer surveillance data are being made available and contributing to cancer control programs. The article describes the building of the cancer registry infrastructure and the successful coordination of efforts among the 2 federal agencies that support cancer registry programs, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Cancer Institute, and the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries. The major US cancer control programs also are described, including the National Comprehensive Cancer Control Program, the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program, and the Colorectal Cancer Control Program. This overview illustrates how cancer registry data can inform public health actions to reduce disparities in cancer outcomes and may be instructional for a variety of cancer control professionals in the United States and in other countries. Cancer 2017;123:4969-76. Published 2017. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
CONCORD is a programme for the global surveillance of cancer survival. In 2015, the second cycle of the program (CONCORD-2) established long-term surveillance of cancer survival worldwide, for the first time, in the largest cancer survival study published to date. CONCORD-2 provided cancer survival trends for 25,676,887 patients diagnosed during the 15-year period between 1995 and 2009 with 1 of 10 common cancers that collectively represented 63% of the global cancer burden in 2009. Herein, the authors summarize the past, describe the present, and outline the future of the CONCORD programme. They discuss the difference between population-based studies and clinical trials, and review the importance of international comparisons of population-based cancer survival. This study will focus on the United States. The authors explain why population-based survival estimates are crucial for driving effective cancer control strategies to reduce the wide and persistent disparities in cancer survival between white and black patients, which are likely to be attributable to differences in access to early diagnosis and optimal treatment. Cancer 2017;123:4977-81. Published 2017. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Although state Medicaid programs cover cancer screening, Medicaid beneficiaries are less likely to be screened for cancer and are more likely to present with tumors of an advanced stage than are those with other insurance. The current study was performed to determine whether state Medicaid eligibility and reimbursement policies affect the receipt of breast, cervical, and colon cancer screening among Medicaid beneficiaries.
Cross-sectional regression analyses of 2007 Medicaid data from 46 states and the District of Columbia were performed to examine associations between state-specific Medicaid reimbursement/eligibility policies and receipt of cancer screening. The study sample included individuals aged 21 years to 64 years who were enrolled in fee-for-service Medicaid for at least 4 months. Subsamples eligible for each screening test were: Papanicolaou test among 2,136,511 patients, mammography among 792,470 patients, colonoscopy among 769,729 patients, and fecal occult blood test among 753,868 patients. State-specific Medicaid variables included median screening test reimbursement, income/financial asset eligibility requirements, physician copayments, and frequency of eligibility renewal.
Increases in screening test reimbursement demonstrated mixed associations (positive and negative) with the likelihood of receiving screening tests among Medicaid beneficiaries. In contrast, increased reimbursements for office visits were found to be positively associated with the odds of receiving all screening tests examined, including colonoscopy (odds ratio [OR], 1.07; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.06-1.08), fecal occult blood test (OR, 1.09; 95% CI, 1.08-1.10), Papanicolaou test (OR, 1.02; 95% CI, 1.02-1.03), and mammography (OR, 1.02; 95% CI, 1.02-1.03). Effects of other state-specific Medicaid policies varied across the screening tests examined.
Increased reimbursement for office visits was consistently associated with an increased likelihood of being screened for cancer, and may be an important policy tool for increasing screening among this vulnerable population.
The difficulties adolescents and young adults (AYAs) encounter during a cancer experience may result in a reduction in or absence of empowerment. The aims of the current study were to assess levels of empowerment and associated (demographic, clinical, or psychological) factors and examine the association between empowerment and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) among AYA patients with cancer.
Patients aged 18 to 35 years at time of cancer diagnosis and who were seen by 1 of the members of the specialized multidisciplinary AYA team of the Radboud University Medical Center were invited to complete questionnaires regarding empowerment; HRQOL; and sociodemographic, clinical, and psychological characteristics (autonomy, coping, unmet social support needs, and psychological distress).
A total of 83 AYA patients completed the questionnaires. The mean age of the participants at the time of diagnosis was 27.5 years. The vast majority had been treated with chemotherapy (86%), had a more advanced stage of disease, and had completed treatment at the time of participation (74%). The mean empowerment level was 154.1 (standard deviation, 17.8) with a range of 114 to 200. Multivariate analysis demonstrated that the autonomy subscales of self-awareness (β = .35), capacity for managing new situations (β = .19), and social support (β = .35) were found to be positively associated with empowerment. Coping difficulties (β = -.19) were found to be negatively associated with empowerment. Empowerment was independently associated with physical (β = .31), psychological (β = .50), social (β = .39), religious (β = .33), and total HRQOL (β = .52; all P<.01).
Low levels of empowerment were associated with low levels of autonomy and social support, female sex, and coping difficulties among AYA patients with cancer. Recognizing these patients as candidates for empowerment interventions ultimately could help to improve HRQOL in late adolescence and young adulthood. Cancer 2017;123:4039-47. © 2017 The Authors. Cancer published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Cancer Society. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.
Out-of-pocket expenditures are thought to be an important barrier to the receipt of cancer preventive services, especially for those of a lower socioeconomic status (SES). The Affordable Care Act (ACA) eliminated out-of-pocket expenditures for recommended services, including mammography and colonoscopy. The objective of this study was to determine changes in the uptake of mammography and colonoscopy among fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries before and after ACA implementation.
Using Medicare claims data, this study identified women who were 70 years old or older and had not undergone mammography in the previous 2 years and men and women who were 70 years old or older, were at increased risk for colorectal cancer, and had not undergone colonoscopy in the past 5 years. The receipt of procedures in the 2-year period before the ACA's implementation (2009-2010) and after its implementation (2011 to September 2012) was also identified. Multivariate generalized estimating equation models were used to determine the independent association and county-level quartile of median income and education with the receipt of testing.
For mammography, a lower SES quartile was associated with less uptake, but the post-ACA disparities were smaller than those in the pre-ACA period. In addition, mammography rates increased from the pre-ACA period to the post-ACA period in all SES quartiles. For colonoscopy, in both the pre- and post-ACA periods, there was an association between uptake and educational level and, to some extent, income. However, there were no appreciable changes in colonoscopy and SES after implementation of the ACA.
The removal of out-of-pocket expenditures may overcome a barrier to the receipt of recommended preventive services, but for colonoscopy, other procedural factors may remain as deterrents. Cancer 2017;123:1585-1589. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Satellite facilities of National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer centers have expanded their regional footprints. This study characterized geographic access to parent and satellite NCI cancer center facilities nationally overall and by sociodemographics.
Parent and satellite NCI cancer center facilities, which were geocoded in ArcGIS, were ascertained. Travel times from every census tract in the continental United States and Hawaii to the nearest parent and satellite facilities were calculated. Census-based population attributes were used to characterize measures of geographic access for sociodemographic groups.
From the 62 NCI cancer centers providing clinical care in 2014, 76 unique parent locations and 211 satellite locations were mapped. The overall proportion of the population within 60 minutes of a facility was 22% for parent facilities and 32.7% for satellite facilities. When satellites were included for potential access, the proportion of some racial groups for which a satellite was the closest NCI cancer center facility increased notably (Native Americans, 22.6% with parent facilities and 39.7% with satellite facilities; whites, 34.8% with parent facilities and 50.3% with satellite facilities; and Asians, 40.0% with parent facilities and 54.0% with satellite facilities), with less marked increases for Hispanic and black populations. Rural populations of all categories had dramatically low proportions living within 60 minutes of an NCI cancer center facility of any type (1.0%-6.6%). Approximately 14% of the population (n = 43,033,310) lived more than 180 minutes from a parent or satellite facility, and most of these individuals were Native Americans and/or rural residents (37% of Native Americans and 41.7% of isolated rural residents).
Racial/ethnic and rural populations showed markedly improved geographic access to NCI cancer center care when satellite facilities were included. Cancer 2017;123:3305-11. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
While there are validated patient-reported outcomes (PRO) instruments for use in specific cancer populations, no validated general instruments exist for use in conditions common to multiple cancers, such as muscle wasting and consequent physical disability. The Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS), a survey in a nationally representative sample of Medicare beneficiaries, includes items from three well known scales with general applicability to cancer patients: Katz activities of daily living (ADL), Rosow-Breslau instrumental ADL (IADL), and a subset of physical performance items from the Nagi scale.
This study evaluated properties of the Katz ADL, Rosow-Breslau IADL, and a subset of the Nagi scale in patients with pancreatic cancer, lung cancer, and myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) using data from MCBS linked with Medicare claims in order to understand the potential utility of the three scales in these populations; understanding patient-perceived significance was not in scope.
The study cohorts included Medicare beneficiaries aged ≥65 years as of 1 January of the year of their first cancer diagnosis with one or more health assessments in a community setting in the MCBS Access to Care data from 1991 to 2009. Beneficiaries had at least two diagnoses in de-identified Medicare claims data linked to the MCBS for one of the following cancers: pancreatic, lung, or MPN. The Katz ADL, Rosow-Breslau IADL, and Nagi scales were calculated to assess physical functioning over time from cancer diagnosis. Psychometric properties for each scale in each cohort were evaluated by testing for internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and responsiveness by comparing differences in mean scale scores over time as cancer progresses, and differences in mean scale scores before and after hospitalization (for lung cancer cohort).
The study cohorts included 90 patients with pancreatic cancer, 863 with lung cancer, and 135 with MPN. Among each cancer cohort, the Katz ADL, Rosow-Breslau IADL, and Nagi scales had acceptable internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha generally between 0.70 and 0.90) and test-retest reliability for consecutive surveys before diagnosis and consecutive surveys after diagnosis (when patients' functioning was more stable). Compared with mean scale scores at the survey 1-2 years before cancer diagnosis (baseline), mean scale scores at the first survey after cancer diagnosis were significantly higher (P < 0.05), indicating worsening, for Katz ADL, Rosow-Breslau IADL, and Nagi scales (items scored 0-1) (0.54 vs. 1.45, 1.15 vs. 2.20, and 2.29 vs. 3.08, respectively, for pancreatic cancer; 0.73 vs. 1.24, 1.29 vs. 2.01, and 2.41 vs. 2.85 for lung cancer; and 0.44 vs. 0.86, 0.87 vs. 1.36, and 1.87 vs. 2.32 for MPN). Among lung cancer patients, scale scores increased significantly following a hospitalization, suggesting a worsening of functional status.
The Katz ADL, Rosow-Breslau IADL, and Nagi scales collected in the MCBS demonstrate acceptable internal consistency and test-retest reliability among patients with pancreatic cancer, lung cancer, and MPN, and are consistent with clinical worsening following diagnosis or hospitalization. These results suggest that using retrospective data may allow researchers to conduct preliminary assessments of existing PRO instruments in new populations of interest and generate useful exploratory disease information before embarking on de novo PRO development.
Survivors of childhood cancer are at excess risk of developing subsequent primary neoplasms but the long-term risks are uncertain.
To investigate long-term risks of subsequent primary neoplasms in survivors of childhood cancer, to identify the types that contribute most to long-term excess risk, and to identify subgroups of survivors at substantially increased risk of particular subsequent primary neoplasms that may require specific interventions.
British Childhood Cancer Survivor Study--a population-based cohort of 17,981 5-year survivors of childhood cancer diagnosed with cancer at younger than 15 years between 1940 and 1991 in Great Britain, followed up through December 2006.
Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs), absolute excess risks (AERs), and cumulative incidence of subsequent primary neoplasms.
After a median follow-up time of 24.3 years (mean = 25.6 years), 1354 subsequent primary neoplasms were ascertained; the most frequently observed being central nervous system (n = 344), nonmelanoma skin cancer (n = 278), digestive (n = 105), genitourinary (n = 100), breast (n = 97), and bone (n = 94). The overall SIR was 4 times more than expected (SIR, 3.9; 95% confidence interval [CI], 3.6-4.2; AER, 16.8 per 10,000 person-years). The AER at older than 40 years was highest for digestive and genitourinary subsequent primary neoplasms (AER, 5.9 [95% CI, 2.5-9.3]; and AER, 6.0 [95%CI, 2.3-9.6] per 10,000 person-years, respectively); 36% of the total AER was attributable to these 2 subsequent primary neoplasm sites. The cumulative incidence of colorectal cancer for survivors treated with direct abdominopelvic irradiation was 1.4% (95% CI, 0.7%-2.6%) by age 50 years, comparable with the 1.2% risk in individuals with at least 2 first-degree relatives affected by colorectal cancer.
Among a cohort of British childhood cancer survivors, the greatest excess risk associated with subsequent primary neoplasms at older than 40 years was for digestive and genitourinary neoplasms.
Genetic testing to determine cancer survivors' risk of developing late effects from their cancer treatment will be increasingly used in survivorship care. This 2-stage study with 64 survivors of childhood cancer and their parents investigated the preferences and acceptability of testing among those who may be at risk of developing late effects.
The first stage (Stage 1) identified the most commonly perceived benefits and concerns regarding genetic testing for the risk of late effects among 24 participants. In Stage 2, during interviews, 20 survivors (55% of whom were female; mean age, 26.0 years [range, 18-39 years]; standard deviation [SD], 0.80) and 20 parents (55% of whom were male; mean age of child survivor, 14.2 years [range, 10-19 years]; SD, 0.79) rated the 7 most common benefits and concerns from those identified in Stage 1. Interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed. Decisional balance ratios were calculated by dividing the participants' average concerns scores with the average benefits scores.
Genetic testing for late effects was highly acceptable: 95% of participants leaned toward testing, and the majority (65.9%) would pay up to Australian $5000. The majority (97.2%) reported it was acceptable to wait for up to 6 months to receive results, and to be offered testing immediately after treatment or when the survivor reached adulthood (62.9%). Survivors and parents had a highly positive decisional balance (Mean (M), 0.5 [SD, 0.38] and M, 0.5 [SD, 0.39], respectively), indicating that perceived benefits outweighed concerns.
Although to our knowledge clinical efficacy has yet to be clearly demonstrated, survivors and parents described positive interest in genetic testing for the risk of developing late effects. Perceived benefits outweighed harms, and the majority of participants would be willing to pay, and wait, for testing. Cancer 2016. © 2016 American Cancer Society. Cancer 2016;122:2876-2885. © 2016 American Cancer Society.
After a pilot study on skin cancer screening was performed between 2003 and 2004 in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany, the country implemented what to the authors' knowledge is the first nationwide skin cancer screening program in the world in 2008. The objective of the current study was to provide details regarding mortality trends in Schleswig-Holstein and Germany in relation to the screening.
Annual age-standardized mortality rates for skin melanoma (using the 10th Revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems [ICD-10] code C43) and malignant neoplasms of ill-defined, secondary, and unspecified sites (ICD-10 code C76-C80) were analyzed. The European Standard population was used for age standardization. A bias analysis was performed to estimate the number of skin melanoma deaths that may have been incorrectly counted as ICD-10 code C76-C80 when the skin melanoma mortality declined in Schleswig-Holstein.
The observed mortality decline in Schleswig-Holstein 5 years after the pilot study was accompanied by a considerable increase in the number of deaths due to malignant neoplasms of ill-defined, secondary, and unspecified sites (ICD-10 code C76-C80) that is not explainable by an increase in the incidence of these neoplasms. Incorrect assignment of 8 to 35 and 12 to 23 skin melanoma deaths per year among men and women, respectively, as ICD-10 code C76-C80 during 2007 through 2010 could explain the transient skin melanoma mortality decline observed in Schleswig-Holstein. Five years after implementation of the program, the nationwide skin melanoma mortality increased (age-standardized rate change of +0.4 per 100,000 person-years [95% confidence interval, 0.2-0.6] in men and +0.1 per 100,000 person-years [95% confidence interval, -0.1 to 0.2] in women).
Although the current analyses raise doubts that the skin cancer screening program in Germany can reduce the skin cancer mortality rate, the authors do not believe the program should be immediately stopped. Further in-depth evaluations are required. Cancer 2016;122:432-437. © 2015 American Cancer Society.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the utility and clinical impact of second-opinion interpretations of outside neuroimaging studies by oncologic neuroradiologists at a National Cancer Institute-designated cancer center.
We performed a retrospective analysis of initial outside and second-opinion radiology reports from 300 computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging studies and identified cases with discrepancies between the two reports. An adult neuro-oncologist, pediatric neuro-oncologist, and head and neck surgeon reviewed each pair of discrepant reports based on their area of expertise, patient age, and the type of study performed. The clinicians were blinded to the origin of each report and recorded whether the differences in the reports would have led to a change in patient management and/or disease staging. Histopathologic analysis, clinical assessment, and/or minimum 3-month imaging follow-up served as the reference standards to establish which of the 2 reports was correct.
Among the 283 cases that met our study criteria, there were 55 neuroimaging studies with disagreements (19%) between the initial outside report and second-opinion interpretation. Patient management and/or disease stage would have been altered in 42 of 283 cases (15%) based on report differences as determined by the 2 neuro-oncologists and the surgeon participating in the study. Sufficient follow-up was available in 35 of 42 cases (83%). The second-opinion interpretation was correct 100% of the time (35/35).
Second-opinion interpretations of neuroimaging studies by subspecialized oncologic neuroradiologists provide added value by reducing error and optimizing the care of cancer patients. Cancer 2016. © 2016 American Cancer Society. Cancer 2016;122:2708-2714. © 2016 American Cancer Society.
Patients with cancer who are infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are less likely to receive cancer treatment compared with HIV-uninfected individuals. However, to the authors' knowledge, the impact of insurance status and comorbidities is unknown.
Data from the National Cancer Data Base were used to study nonelderly adults diagnosed with several common cancers from 2003 to 2011. Cancer treatment was defined as chemotherapy, surgery, radiotherapy, or any combination during the first course of treatment. Multivariate logistic regression was used to examine associations between HIV status and lack of cancer treatment, and identify predictors for lack of treatment among HIV-infected patients.
A total of 10,265 HIV-infected and 2,219,232 HIV-uninfected cases were included. In multivariate analysis, HIV-infected patients with cancer were found to be more likely to lack cancer treatment for cancers of the head and neck (adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 1.48; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.09-2.01), upper gastrointestinal tract (aOR, 2.62; 95% CI, 2.04-3.37), colorectum (aOR, 1.70; 95% CI, 1.17-2.48), lung (aOR, 2.46; 95% CI, 2.19-2.76), breast (aOR, 2.14; 95% CI, 1.16-3.98), cervix (aOR, 2.81; 95% CI, 1.77-4.45), prostate (aOR, 2.16; 95% CI, 1.69-2.76), Hodgkin lymphoma (aOR, 1.92; 95% CI, 1.66-2.22), and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (aOR, 1.82; 95% CI, 1.65-2.00). Predictors of a lack of cancer treatment among HIV-infected individuals varied by tumor type (solid tumor vs lymphoma), but black race and a lack of private insurance were found to be predictors for both groups.
In the United States, HIV-infected patients with cancer appear to be less likely to receive cancer treatment regardless of insurance and comorbidities. To the authors' knowledge, the current study is the largest study of cancer treatment in HIV-infected patients with cancer in the United States and provides evidence of cancer treatment disparities even after controlling for differences with regard to insurance status and comorbidities. Further work should focus on addressing differential cancer treatment. Cancer 2016;122:2399-2407. © 2016 American Cancer Society.
Metastatic lesions in prostate cancer beyond the bone have prognostic importance and affect clinical therapeutic decisions. Few data exist regarding the prevalence of soft-tissue metastases at the initial diagnosis of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC).
This study analyzed 232 men with nonmetastatic (M0) castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) who developed metastases detected by a bone scan or computed tomography (CT). All bone scans and CT scans within the 30 days before or after the mCRPC diagnosis were reviewed. The rate of soft-tissue metastases among those undergoing CT was determined. Then, predictors of soft-tissue metastases and visceral and lymph node metastases were identified.
Compared with men undergoing CT (n = 118), men undergoing only bone scans (n = 114) were more likely to have received primary treatment (P = .048), were older (P = .013), and less recently developed metastases (P = .018). Among those undergoing CT, 52 (44%) had soft-tissue metastases, including 20 visceral metastases (17%) and 41 lymph node metastases (35%), whereas 30% had no bone involvement. In a univariable analysis, only prostate-specific antigen (PSA) predicted soft-tissue metastases (odds ratio [OR], 1.27; P = .047), and no statistically significant predictors of visceral metastases were found. A higher PSA level was associated with an increased risk of lymph node metastases (OR, 1.38; P = .014), whereas receiving primary treatment was associated with decreased risk (OR, 0.36; P = .015).
The data suggest that there is a relatively high rate of soft-tissue metastasis (44%) among CRPC patients undergoing CT at the initial diagnosis of metastases, including some men with no bone involvement. Therefore, forgoing CT during a metastatic evaluation may lead to an underdiagnosis of soft-tissue metastases and an underdiagnosis of metastases in general. Cancer 2015. © 2015 American Cancer Society. Cancer 2016;122:222-229. © 2015 American Cancer Society.
Both the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services' (CMS) Hospital Compare star rating and surgical case volume have been publicized as metrics that can help patients to identify high-quality hospitals for complex care such as cancer surgery. The current study evaluates the relationship between the CMS' star rating, surgical volume, and short-term outcomes after major cancer surgery.
National Medicare data were used to evaluate the relationship between hospital star ratings and cancer surgery volume quintiles. Then, multilevel logistic regression models were fit to examine the association between cancer surgery outcomes and both star rankings and surgical volumes. Lastly, a graphical approach was used to compare how well star ratings and surgical volume predicted cancer surgery outcomes.
This study identified 365,752 patients undergoing major cancer surgery for 1 of 9 cancer types at 2,550 hospitals. Star rating was not associated with surgical volume (P < .001). However, both the star rating and surgical volume were correlated with 4 short-term cancer surgery outcomes (mortality, complication rate, readmissions, and prolonged length of stay). The adjusted predicted probabilities for 5- and 1-star hospitals were 2.3% and 4.5% for mortality, 39% and 48% for complications, 10% and 15% for readmissions, and 8% and 16% for a prolonged length of stay, respectively. The adjusted predicted probabilities for hospitals with the highest and lowest quintile cancer surgery volumes were 2.7% and 5.8% for mortality, 41% and 55% for complications, 12.2% and 11.6% for readmissions, and 9.4% and 13% for a prolonged length of stay, respectively. Furthermore, surgical volume and the star rating were similarly associated with mortality and complications, whereas the star rating was more highly associated with readmissions and prolonged length of stay.
In the absence of other information, these findings suggest that the star rating may be useful to patients when they are selecting a hospital for major cancer surgery. However, more research is needed before these ratings can supplant surgical volume as a measure of surgical quality. Cancer 2017;123:4259-4267. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Financial burden from cancer treatment is increasingly being recognized as a threat to optimal access, quality, and outcomes of cancer care for patients. Although research in the area is moving at a fast pace, multiple questions remain unanswered, such as how to practically integrate the assessment and management of financial burden into routine health care delivery for patients with cancer. Although psychological distress screening for patients undergoing cancer treatment now is commonplace, the authors raise the provocative idea of universal screening for financial distress to identify and assist vulnerable groups of patients. Herein, the authors outline the arguments to support screening for financial burden in addition to psychological distress, examining it as an independent patient-reported outcome for all patients with cancer at various time points during their treatment. The authors describe the proximal and downstream impact of such a strategy and reflect on some challenges and potential solutions to help integrate this concept into routine cancer care delivery. Cancer 2017;123:4092-4096. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Patient navigation may reduce cancer disparities associated with socioeconomic status (SES) and household factors. This study examined whether these factors were associated with delays in diagnostic resolution among patients with cancer screening abnormalities and whether patient navigation ameliorated these delays.
This study analyzed data from 5 of 10 centers of the National Cancer Institute's Patient Navigation Research Program, which collected SES and household data on employment, income, education, housing, marital status, and household composition. The primary outcome was the time to diagnostic resolution after a cancer screening abnormality. Separate adjusted Cox proportional hazard models were fit for each SES and household factor, and an interaction between that factor and the intervention status was included.
Among the 3777 participants (1968 in the control arm and 1809 in the navigation intervention arm), 91% were women, and the mean age was 44 years; 43% were Hispanic, 28% were white, and 27% were African American. Within the control arm, the unemployed experienced a longer time to resolution than those employed full-time (hazard ratio [HR], 0.85; P = .02). Renters (HR, 0.81; P = .02) and those with other (ie, unstable) housing (HR, 0.60; P < .001) had delays in comparison with homeowners. Never married (HR, 0.70; P < .001) and previously married participants (HR, 0.85; P = .03) had a longer time to care than married participants. There were no differences in the time to diagnostic resolution with any of these variables within the navigation intervention arm.
Delays in diagnostic resolution exist by employment, housing type, and marital status. Patient navigation eliminated these disparities in the study sample. These findings demonstrate the value of providing patient navigation to patients at high risk for delays in cancer care.
Single-modality radiotherapy is considered a standard-of-care option for certain stage III, T1-2N1 head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). The role of concomitant chemoradiation is not well established because there have been no studies comparing chemoradiation with radiation alone in this population.
This study analyzed patients in the National Cancer Data Base with cT1-2N1M0 invasive squamous cell carcinomas of the oropharynx, larynx, and hypopharynx who were diagnosed between 2004 and 2012 and were undergoing definitive radiation. Patients who were undergoing surgery before radiation with unknown follow-up or for whom either the receipt or timing of chemotherapy was unknown were excluded.
In all, 5030 patients with T1-2N1 oropharyngeal, laryngeal, or hypopharyngeal cancer were included. The median follow-up was 56.8 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 55.7-58.6 months). Overall, 68% of the patients received concomitant chemoradiation (CCRT). The use of CCRT significantly increased during the time period of this study from 53% in 2004 to 78% in 2012 (P < .001). CCRT was associated with improved overall survival (OS) in comparison with radiation alone in a multivariate analysis (hazard ratio [HR], 0.80; 95% CI, 0.72-0.88; P < .001). In propensity score-adjusted analyses, CCRT remained significantly associated with improved OS, with 5-year OS rates of 63.5% (95% CI, 60.7%-66.2%) and 55.6% (95% CI, 52.7%-58.4%; P < .001) with CCRT and radiation alone, respectively. Subgroup analyses showed a benefit across the majority of subgroups, including patients with oropharyngeal cancer (HR, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.65-0.85; P < .001).
Concomitant chemoradiation is associated with improved survival for patients with T1-2N1 HNSCC. Prospective trials in this population should be pursued. Cancer 2017;123:1555-1565. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Routine monitoring of cancer-related distress is recognized as essential to quality care and mandated by a major accrediting organization. However, to the authors' knowledge, few cancer-specific measures have been developed to date to assess the multiple cancer-related factors contributing to this distress. In the current study, the authors examined the psychometric properties of the Cancer and Treatment Distress (CTXD) measure over time in hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) recipients.
As a secondary analysis of a multicenter randomized controlled clinical trial, adult patients undergoing autologous or allogeneic HCT completed patient-reported outcomes including the CTXD and the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form-36 (SF-36) before transplantation and 100 days and 180 days after HCT.
Across 21 transplantation centers, a total of 701 patients consented, underwent transplantation, and were included in the current analyses, 645 of whom were alive at 100 days and 618 of whom were alive at 180 days. Internal consistency reliability was found to be strong for the overall CTXD at the 3 time points: Cronbach alphas (α) were .94, .95, and .95, respectively. Subscale reliability met hypothesized levels of an α>.70 across time, with the lowest reliability noted for the Identity subscale at 180 days (α = .77). Correlations with the SF-36 Mental Health subscale were higher than with the Physical Functioning subscale at each time point, thereby supporting convergent and discriminant validity. Strong correlations of the pretransplantation CTXD with the posttransplantation CTXD and SF-36 Mental Health subscale supported predictive validity.
The CTXD is reliable and valid as a measure of cancer distress both before and after HCT. It may be a useful tool for measuring dimensions of distress and for defining those patients requiring treatment for distress during and after transplantation. Cancer 2017;123:1416-1423. © 2016 American Cancer Society.
Physical activity (PA) has been linked to a lower risk of developing and dying of cancer, yet many cancer survivors do not exercise. In the current study, the authors evaluated the impact of the LIVESTRONG at the YMCA exercise program, available at Young Men's Christian Associations (YMCAs) across the United States, on PA, fitness, quality of life, fatigue, body composition, serum biomarkers, and program safety in cancer survivors.
Cancer survivors were recruited through the Yale Cancer Center and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and randomized to a 12-week, twice-weekly LIVESTRONG at the YMCA exercise program at YMCAs in Connecticut or Massachusetts or to a control group. Questionnaires, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry scans, 6-minute walk tests (6MWTs), and a fasting blood draw were completed at baseline and at 12 weeks. Intervention effects were evaluated using mixed model repeated measures analysis, with changes at 12 weeks in PA and 6MWT as the primary endpoints.
A total of 186 participants were randomized (95 to the exercise group and 91 to the control group). The majority of patients were diagnosed with AJCC stage I to II cancer and 53% had breast cancer. Participants randomized to the LIVESTRONG at the YMCA program experienced increases in PA (71% exercising at ≥ 150 minutes/week vs 26% of controls; P<.05) and improvements in the 6MWT (group difference: 28.9 meters [95% confidence interval, 0.3-49.0; P = .004]) and quality of life (group difference: 2.6 [95% confidence interval, 0.1-5.0; P = .04]). No adverse events were reported.
The LIVESTRONG at the YMCA exercise program has the potential to impact thousands of survivors across the YMCA network and could lead to improvements in disease and psychosocial outcomes in the growing population of cancer survivors. Cancer 2017;123:1249-1258. © 2016 American Cancer Society.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in pure urothelial bladder cancer provides a significant survival benefit. However, to the authors' knowledge, it is unknown whether this benefit persists in histological variants. The objective of the current study was to assess the effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on the probability of non-organ-confined disease and overall survival after radical cystectomy (RC) in patients with histological variants.
Querying the National Cancer Data Base, the authors identified 2018 patients with histological variants who were undergoing RC for bladder cancer between 2003 and 2012. Variants were categorized as micropapillary or sarcomatoid differentiation, squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, neuroendocrine tumors, and other histology. Logistic regression models estimated the odds of non-organ-confined disease at the time of RC for each histological variant, stratified by the receipt of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Cox regression models were used to examine the effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on overall mortality in each variant subgroup.
Patients with neuroendocrine tumors (odds ratio [OR], 0.16; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 0.08-0.32 [P<.001]), micropapillary differentiation (OR, 0.30; 95% CI, 0.10-0.95 [P=.041]), sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma (OR, 0.40; 95% CI, 0.17-0.94 [P=.035]), and adenocarcinoma (OR, 0.24; 95% CI, 0.06-0.91 [P=.035]) were less likely to harbor non-organ-confined disease at the time of RC when treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. An overall survival benefit for neoadjuvant chemotherapy was only found in patients with neuroendocrine tumors (hazard ratio, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.33-0.74 [P=.001]).
Patients with neuroendocrine tumors benefit from neoadjuvant chemotherapy, as evidenced by better overall survival and lower rates of non-organ-confined disease at the time of RC. For tumors with micropapillary differentiation, sarcomatoid differentiation, or adenocarcinoma, neoadjuvant chemotherapy decreased the frequency of non-organ-confined disease at the time of RC. However, this favorable effect did not translate into a statistically significant overall survival benefit for these patients, potentially due to the aggressive tumor biology. Cancer 2017;123:4346-55. © 2017 American Cancer Society.
Oxidative stress is reported to regulate several apoptotic and necrotic cell death pathways in auditory tissues. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) can be activated under oxidative stress, which is the hallmark of parthanatos. Autophagy, which serves either a pro-survival or pro-death function, can also be stimulated by oxidative stress, but the role of autophagy and its relationship with parthanatos underlying this activation in the inner ear remains unknown. In this study, we established an oxidative stress model in vitro by glucose oxidase/glucose (GO/G), which could continuously generate low concentrations of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> to mimic continuous exposure to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> in physiological conditions, for investigation of oxidative stress-induced cell death mechanisms and the regulatory role of PARP-1 in this process. We observed that GO/G induced stria marginal cells (MCs) death via upregulation of PARP-1 expression, accumulation of polyADP-ribose (PAR) polymers, decline of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and nuclear translocation of apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), which all are biochemical features of parthanatos. PARP-1 knockdown rescued GO/G-induced MCs death, as well as abrogated downstream molecular events of PARP-1 activation. In addition, we demonstrated that GO/G stimulated autophagy and PARP-1 knockdown suppressed GO/G-induced autophagy in MCs. Interestingly, autophagy suppression by 3-Methyladenine (3-MA) accelerated GO/G-induced parthanatos, indicating a pro-survival function of autophagy in GO/G-induced MCs death. Taken together, these data suggested that PARP-1 played dual roles by modulating parthanatos and autophagy in oxidative stress-induced MCs death, which may be considered as a promising therapeutic target for ameliorating oxidative stress-related hearing disorders.
The relationship between diabetes and oxidative stress has been previously reported. Exercise represents a useful non-pharmacological strategy for the treatment in type 2 diabetic (T2DM) patients, but high intensity exercise can induce a transient inflammatory state and increase oxidative stress. Nutritional strategies that may contribute to the reduction of oxidative stress induced by acute exercise are necessary. The aim of this study was to examine if n-3 PUFA supplementation intervention can attenuate the inflammatory response and oxidative stress associated with high intensity exercise in this population. As a primary outcome, lipoperoxidation measurements (TBARS and F2-isoprostanes) were selected.
Thirty T2DM patients, without chronic complications, were randomly allocated into two groups: placebo (gelatin capsules) or n-3 PUFA (capsules containing 180 mg of eicosapentaenoic acid and 120 mg of docosahexaenoic acid). Blood samples were collected fasting before and after 8 weeks supplementation. In the beginning and at the end of protocol, an acute exercise was performed (treadmill), and new blood samples were collected before and immediately after the exercise for measurements of oxidative stress and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP).
After the supplementation period, a decrease in triglycerides levels was observed only in n-3 PUFA supplementation group (mean difference and 95% CI of 0.002 (0.000-0.004), <i>p</i> = 0.005). Supplementation also significantly reduced TRAP levels after exercise (mean difference and 95% CI to 9641 (- 20,068-39,351) for - 33,884 (- 56,976 - -10,793), <i>p</i> = 0.004, Cohen's <i>d</i> effect size = 1.12), but no significant difference was observed in n-3 PUFA supplementation group in lipoperoxidation parameters as TBARS (mean difference and 95% CI to - 3.8 (- 10-2.4) for - 2.9 (- 1.6-7.4) or F2-isoprostanes (mean difference and 95% CI -0.05 (- 0.19-0.10) for - 0.02 (- 0.19-0.16), <i>p</i> > 0.05 for both.
PUFA n-3 supplementation reduced triglycerides as well as TRAP levels after exercise, without a significant effect on inflammatory and oxidative stress markers.This study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov with the registration number of NCT03182712.
Scedosporium species are opportunistic pathogens causing a great variety of infections in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals. The Scedosporium genus ranks the second among the filamentous fungi colonizing the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), after Aspergillus fumigatus, and most species are capable to chronically colonize the respiratory tract of these patients. Nevertheless, few data are available regarding evasion of the inhaled conidia to the host immune response. Upon microbial infection, macrophages and neutrophils release reactive oxygen species (ROS). To colonize the respiratory tract, the conidia need to germinate despite the oxidative stress generated by phagocytic cells. Germination of spores from different clinical or environmental isolates of the major Scedosporium species was investigated in oxidative stress conditions. All tested species showed susceptibility to oxidative stress. However, when comparing clinical and environmental isolates, differences in germination capabilities under oxidative stress conditions were seen between species as well as within each species. Among environmental isolates, Scedosporium aurantiacum isolates were the most resistant to oxidative stress whereas Scedosporium dehoogii were the most susceptible. Overall, the differences observed between Scedosporium species in the capacity to germinate under oxidative stress conditions could explain their varying prevalence and pathogenicity.
Ophthalmic acid (OPH), γ-glutamyl-L-2-aminobutyryl-glycine, a tripeptide analogue of glutathione (GSH), has recently captured considerable attention as a biomarker of oxidative stress in animals. The OPH and GSH biosynthesis, as well as some biochemical behaviors, are very similar. Here, we sought to investigate the presence of OPH in plants and its possible relationship with GSH, known to possess multiple functions in the plant development, growth and response to environmental changes.
HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was used to examine the occurrence of OPH in leaves from various plant species, and flours from several plant seeds. Different types of oxidative stress, i.e., water, dark, paraquat, and cadmium stress, were induced in rye, barley, oat, and winter wheat leaves to evaluate the effects on the levels of OPH and its metabolic precursors.
OPH and its dipeptide precursor, γ-glutamyl-2-aminobutyric acid, were found to occur in phylogenetically distant plants. Interestingly, the levels of OPH were tightly associated with the oxidative stress tested. Levels of OPH precursors, γ-glutamyl-2-aminobutyric acid and 2-aminobutyric acid, the latter efficiently formed in plants via biosynthetic pathways absent in the animal kingdom, were also found to increase during oxidative stress.
OPH occurs in plants and its levels are tightly associated with oxidative stress.
OPH behaves as an oxidative stress marker and its biogenesis might occur through a biochemical pathway common to many living organisms.
The modes of action of pollutants are diverse, and a common consequences to pollutant exposure is oxidative stress. This phenomenon is caused by an imbalance or disurption in the control of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) resulting in an accumulation of free radicals. Oxidative stress may cause damages to the DNA, phospholipids and proteins, and lead to cell death. Due to the possible contribution of oxidative stress to pollutant toxicity, it is valuable to assess its occurrence, role and mechanism. Detection of oxidative stress at low concentrations soon after the onset of exposure can be a sensitive, general marker for contamination. This study aimed at developing and benchmarking a set of novel fluorescence-based procedures to assess the occurrence of oxidative stress in zebrafish larvae (96 hpf) by measuring the antioxidant glutathione (GSH) and general ROS. Zebrafish larvae were exposed to tert-butyl hydroperoxide (t-BHP). ROS and GSH were made visible by means of specific fluorescent molecular probes in different experimental scenarios. The induction was qualified using microscopy and quantified through photometric measurement. For quantitative assessment, an approach based on homogenized larvae and a non-invasive plate assay were developed. The novel procedures proved suitable for oxidative stress detection. Comparisons of qualitative to quantitative data showed that the orientation of the larvae in the well can influence fluorescence data evaluation. The non-invasive quantitative assay proved robust against any influence of the orientation of the larvae. The developed protocols promise to be useful tools for the detection of oxidative stress in zebrafish larvae.
Early B cell factor 1 (EBF1) is a transcription factor involved in the differentiation of several stem cell lineages and it is a negative regulator of estrogen receptors. EBF1 is down-regulated in many tumors, and is believed to play suppressive roles in cancer promotion and progression. However, the functional roles of EBF1 in carcinogenesis are unclear. Liver fluke-infection-associated cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is an oxidative stress-driven cancer of bile duct epithelium. In this study, we investigated EBF1 expression in tissues from CCA patients, CCA cell lines (KKU-213, KKU-214 and KKU-156), cholangiocyte (MMNK1) and its oxidative stress-resistant (ox-MMNK1-L) cell lines. The formation of 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxodG) was used as an oxidative stress marker. Our results revealed that EBF1 expression was suppressed in cancer cells compared with the individual normal bile duct cells at tumor adjacent areas of CCA tissues. CCA patients with low EBF1 expression and high formation of 8-oxodG were shown to correlate with poor survival. Moreover, EBF1 was suppressed in the oxidative stress-resistant cell line and all of CCA cell lines compared to the cholangiocyte cell line. This suggests that prolonged oxidative stress suppressed EBF1 expression and the reduced EBF1 level may facilitate CCA genesis. To elucidate the significance of EBF1 suppression in CCA genesis, EBF1 expression of the MMNK1 cell line was down-regulated by siRNA technique, and its effects on stem cell properties (CD133 and Oct3/4 expressions), tumorigenic properties (cell proliferation, wound healing and cell migration), estrogen responsive gene (TFF1), estrogen-stimulated wound healing, and cell migration were examined. The results showed that CD133, Oct3/4 and TFF1 expression levels, wound healing, and cell migration of EBF1 knockdown-MMNK1 cells were significantly increased. Also, cell migration of EBF1-knockdown cells was significantly enhanced after 17β-estradiol treatment. Our findings suggest that EBF1 down-regulation via oxidative stress induces stem cell properties, tumorigenic properties and estrogen responses of cholangiocytes leading to CCA genesis with aggressive clinical outcomes.
Oxidative stress induced vascular endothelial cell injure is one of the key and initial event in the development of atherosclerosis. Septin4, as a member of GTP binding protein family, is widely expressed in the eukaryotic cells and considered to be an essential component of the cytoskeleton which is involved in many important physiological processes. However, whether Septin4 is involved in cardiovascular diseases, such as oxidative stress inducted endothelial cell injury still unclear. PARP1 as a DNA repair enzyme can be activated by identifying DNA damaged fragments, which consumes high levels of energy and leads to vascular endothelial cell apoptosis. Here, our results first found that Septin4 is involved in oxidative stress induced endothelial cell ROS production and apoptosis through knock-down and over-expression Septin4 approaches. Furthermore, to explore how Septin4 is involved in oxidative stress induced endothelial cells injure, we first identified that Septin4 is a novel PARP1 interacting protein and the interaction is enhanced under oxidative stress. In conclusions, our founding indicates that Septin4 is a novel essential factor involved in oxidative stress induced vascular endothelial cell injury by interacting with apoptosis-related protein PARP1.
Drug-induced oxidative stress can occur in numerous tissues and organ systems (liver, kidney, ear, nervous system, and cardiovascular system). Cancer therapy with cisplatin is associated with side effects to which oxidative stress may contribute. We have compared the influences of cisplatin (reference compound) and its' analogues (dichloro(1,2-diaminocyclohexane)platinum(II) and chloro(2,2':6',2″-terpyridine)platinum(II)) in a model of isolated rat heart using the Langendorff technique. The production of oxidative stress biomarkers, antioxidant enzymes, myocardial damage, and expression of Bax, OH-1, and SODs were studied. Cisplatin and the analogues were perfused at concentration of 10<sup>-6</sup> and 10<sup>-5</sup> M during 30 min. The results of this study showed that examined platinum complexes had different ability to induce oxidative stress of isolated perfused rat heart. Varying the carrier ligands, such as 1,2-diaminocyclohexane and 2,2':6',2″-terpyridine, related to amino ligands (cisplatin) directly influenced the strength to induce production of oxidative stress biomarkers. Introducing 2,2':6',2″-terpyridine ligands provoked the smallest changes in antioxidant enzymes activity, lipid peroxidation, and expression of heme oxygenase-1, that undoubtedly indicated that this complex had the lowest impact on redox status in heart tissue. These findings may be useful in synthesis of novel platinum analogues with lower potential for oxidative stress induction. However, the fact that platinum complexes could induce toxic effects in the heart by other mechanisms should be taken into the consideration.
Ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) is one of the major causes of postoperative renal allograft dysfunction, which is mainly the result of proinflammatory reactions including inflammatory responses, oxidative stress, and metabolic disorders. Resveratrol (RSV) plays an important role in protecting various organs in IRI because it reduces oxidative stress, lessens the inflammatory response, and exerts anti-apoptotic effects. The aim of this study was to demonstrate the renoprotective effect of RSV in inhibiting inflammatory responses, reducing oxidative stress, and decreasing cell apoptosis in vivo and in vitro.
RSV was administered before renal ischemia and H2O2 induction. Serum and kidneys were harvested 24 h after reperfusion and NRK-52E cells were collected 4 h after H2O2 stimulation. Serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen were used to assess renal function. Hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed to assess histological injury. Quantitative real-time PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were used to assess proinflammatory cytokine expression. Oxidative stress-related proteins, such as Nrf2 and TLR4, were evaluated by western blot. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling assay was used to detect apoptotic cells in tissues, and western blot was used to evaluate the expression of caspase-3, -8, and -9 in this study.
RSV inhibited inflammatory responses and improved renal function after renal IRI. Additionally, RSV decreased oxidative stress and reduced cell apoptosis by upregulating Nrf2 expression, downregulating the TLR4/NF-κB signaling pathway, and by decreasing caspase-3 activity and caspase cascades.
Our study demonstrated the mechanisms underlying RSV renoprotection. We found that RSV exerts its greatest effects by blocking inflammatory responses, lowering oxidative stress, and reducing apoptosis via the Nrf2/TLR4/NF-κB pathway.
Oxidative stress and inflammation have been implicated in the pathogenesis of vascular dementia (VD). Thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) plays a vital role in oxidative stress and NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation. There is evidence that acupuncture has an antioxidative and neuroprotective effect in VD. In this study, we investigated whether acupuncture can attenuate cognitive impairment via inhibiting TXNIP-associated oxidative stress and inflammation in VD rats.
Both common carotid arteries were occluded (2-vessel occlusion [2VO]) in rats to model VD. The neuroprotective effect of acupuncture was assessed by the Morris water maze and Nissl staining. Oxidative stress was assessed by detecting levels of reactive oxygen species, DNA oxidation, and antioxidase. Western blot, real-time PCR, and immunofluorescence were used to detect the expression of TXNIP, NLRP3, caspase-1, and IL-1β. A TXNIP siRNA intraventricular injection was applied to investigate whether acupuncture mimicked the effect of TXNIP inhibitor.
Our findings demonstrated that VD rats treated with acupuncture had reduced hippocampal neuronal loss and oxidative stress. The upregulation of TXNIP, NLRP3, caspase-1, and IL-1β induced by 2VO was also reversed by acupuncture. Furthermore, TXNIP siRNA had a similar effect as acupuncture on cognition, hippocampal neurons, and ROS production in VD rats.
In conclusion, our study suggests that the neuroprotective effects of acupuncture in VD are mediated through reducing expression of TXNIP-associated oxidative stress and inflammation.
Fibulin-3, an extracellular matrix glycoprotein, inhibits vascular oxidative stress and remodeling in hypertension. Oxidative stress is prevalent in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients and is an important mediator of osteo-/chondrogenic transdifferentiation and calcification of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) during hyperphosphatemia. Therefore, the present study explored the effects of Fibulin-3 on phosphate-induced vascular calcification.
Experiments were performed in primary human aortic smooth muscle cells (HAoSMCs) treated with control or with phosphate without or with additional treatment with recombinant human Fibulin-3 protein or with hydrogen peroxide as an exogenous source of oxidative stress.
Treatment with calcification medium significantly increased calcium deposition in HAoSMCs, an effect significantly blunted by additional treatment with Fibulin-3. Moreover, phosphate-induced alkaline phosphatase activity and mRNA expression of osteogenic and chondrogenic markers MSX2, CBFA1, SOX9 and ALPL were all significantly reduced by addition of Fibulin-3. These effects were paralleled by similar regulation of oxidative stress in HAoSMCs. Phosphate treatment significantly up-regulated mRNA expression of the oxidative stress markers NOX4 and CYBA, down-regulated total antioxidant capacity and increased the expression of downstream effectors of oxidative stress PAI-1, MMP2 and MMP9 as well as BAX/BLC2 ratio in HAoSMCs, all effects blocked by additional treatment with Fibulin-3. Furthermore, the protective effects of Fibulin-3 on phosphate-induced osteogenic and chondrogenic markers expression in HAoSMCs were reversed by additional treatment with hydrogen peroxide.
Fibulin-3 attenuates phosphate-induced osteo-/ chondrogenic transdifferentiation and calcification of VSMCs, effects involving inhibition of oxidative stress. Up-regulation or supplementation of Fibulin-3 may be beneficial in reducing the progression of vascular calcification during hyperphosphatemic conditions such as CKD.
Metabolic diseases such as obesity and type-2 diabetes (T2D) are known to be associated with chronic low-grade inflammation called metabolic inflammation together with an oxidative stress milieu found in the expanding adipose tissue. The innate immune Toll-like receptors (TLR) such as TLR2 and TLR4 have emerged as key players in metabolic inflammation; nonetheless, TLR10 expression in the adipose tissue and its significance in obesity/T2D remain unclear.
TLR10 gene expression was determined in the adipose tissue samples from healthy non-diabetic and T2D individuals, 13 each, using real-time RT-PCR. TLR10 protein expression was determined by immunohistochemistry, confocal microscopy, and flow cytometry. Regarding in vitro studies, THP-1 cells, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), or primary monocytes were treated with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) for induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated oxidative stress. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity was measured using a commercial kit. Data (mean±SEM) were compared using unpaired student's t-test and P<0.05 was considered significant.
The adipose tissue TLR10 gene/protein expression was found to be significantly upregulated in obesity as well as T2D which correlated with body mass index (BMI). ROS-mediated oxidative stress induced high levels of TLR10 gene/protein expression in monocytic cells and PBMC. In these cells, oxidative stress induced a time-dependent increase in SOD activity. Pre-treatment of cells with anti-oxidants/ROS scavengers diminished the expression of TLR10. ROS-induced TLR10 expression involved the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-κB)/mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling as well as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. H2O2-induced oxidative stress interacted synergistically with palmitate to trigger the expression of TLR10 which associated with enhanced expression of proinflammatory cytokines/chemokine.
Oxidative stress induces the expression of TLR10 which may represent an immune marker for metabolic inflammation.
Mounting studies have indicated the role of berberine, SIRT1, and oxidative stress in diabetes, respectively. However, few studies have demonstrated their correlation and regulation function in diabetes. Therefore, the protective effect of berberine in diabetic and the underlying core mechanism were investigated in the current study. Diabetic mice model in vivo were established. Mouse pancreatic beta-cell line NIT-1 cells were treated with 30 mM high glucose to induce diabetic condition in vitro. Serum biochemical parameters (glucose, total cholesterol, and triglycerides) were detected. Oxidative stress indicators (MDA, SOD1), along with miR-106b and SIRT1 expression in islets and cells were also assessed. Direct targeting relationship between miR-106b and SIRT1 was discussed by dual luciferase reporter gene assay. Diabetic model in vivo and in vitro were both established successfully. The expression of serum biochemical parameters was increased, and oxidative stress parameters, and miR-106b, SIRT1 were abnormally expressed in diabetic mice and NIT-1 cells. Meanwhile, berberine could alleviate oxidative stress injury in diabetic progression. Through dual luciferase reporter gene assay, we found that SIRT1 was a target gene of miR-106b. In addition, miR-106b over-expression could reverse the protection of berberine in NIT-1 cells against from oxidative stress induced by high glucose. Berberine could attenuate oxidative stress of diabetic mice at least partly through miR-106b/SIRT1 pathway and affecting the function of islets, which might be beneficial in reducing the cardiovascular risk factors in diabetes. J. Cell. Biochem. 118: 4349-4357, 2017. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Exposure to carbon black nanoparticles (CBNPs), a well-known industrial production, promotes pulmonary toxicity through inflammation and oxidative stress. Recent studies show that some polyphenols exert their antioxidant properties through regulation of protein kinase C-α (PKC-α) and NADPH oxidase (Nox) signaling. Resveratrol, a dietary polyphenol in fruits, possesses various health beneficial effects including anti-inflammatory and antioxidative properties. In this study, we aimed to elucidate the involvement of PKC-α and Nox in CBNPs-induced inflammation and oxidative stress, and to investigate the protective effects of resveratrol on CBNP-induced inflammation and oxidative stress in human lung epithelial A549 cells.
The production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the change of mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) were measured by flow cytometry. Nitric oxide (NO) was measured using the Griess reagent, and prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> (PGE<sub>2</sub>) production was detected by ELISA, while protein expressions were measured by Western blotting analysis.
In lung epithelial A549 cells, CBNPs significantly enhanced oxidative stress by upregulation of Nox2 and membrane expression of p67<sup>phox</sup> accompanied with increase of ROS production. CBNPs also increased inflammatory factors, including iNOS, COX-2, NO and PGE<sub>2</sub>. However, resveratrol attenuated the above effects induced by CBNPs in A549 cells; additionally, CBNPs-induced activation of PKC-α was observed. We found that PKC-α inhibitor (Gö6976) could attenuate CBNPs-induced inflammation by down-regulation of ROS, NO and PGE<sub>2</sub> production in A549 cells, suggesting PKC-α might be involved in CBNPs-induced oxidative stress and inflammation. Our results also found resveratrol was able to inhibit protein expression of PKC-α induced by CBNPs. Moreover, ROS scavenger (NAC) and Nox inhibitor (DPI) attenuated CBNPs-induced expressions of iNOS and COX-2. DPI could also attenuate CBNPs-induced ROS, NO and PGE<sub>2</sub> production.
Resveratrol attenuated CBNPs-induced oxidative and inflammatory factors in lung epithelial A549 cells, at least in part via inhibiting PKC-α- and Nox-related signaling.
To investigate the impact of miRNA (microRNA) on hepatic oxidative stress damage under the human mesenchymal stem cell conditioned medium (MSC-CM) and explore the roles of the beta-1 adrenergic receptor (ADRB1) and hexokinase 2 (HK2) in this process.
Hydrogen peroxide was used to induce oxidative stress injury in the human normal liver cell line L02. MSC-CM was separately prepared. After treatment with MSC-CM, the protective effects of MSC-CM on oxidative stress injury were assessed by changes in apoptosis, cell viability, cell cycle, and mitochondrial membrane potential. According to the microarray analysis, 19 disparately expressed miRNAs were selected for RT-PCR and miR143 identified as having significant differential expression in MSC-CM against oxidative stress injury. Subsequently, the predicted target proteins of miR143 were selected by bioinformatics software, and verified by western blot. In addition, down-regulation and up-regulation of miR143 expression and hydrogen peroxide induced hypoxia injury were carried out on L02 cells to study the role of miR143.
MSC-CM significantly attenuated H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> induced oxidative stress injury. The expression of miR143 was increased following oxidative stress injury whereas it decreased after MSC-CM treatment. The expression levels of HK2 and ADRB1 regulated by miR143 and Bcl-2 decreased under H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> treatment but were restored following MSC-CM treatment. However the expression levels of Bax and BMF increased after H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> injury and decreased after MSC-CM treatment. Moreover over-expression or down-regulation of miR143 aggravated or alleviated hepatocyte apoptosis respectively.
MSC-CM may alleviate H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> induced oxidative stress injury by inhibiting apoptosis and adjusting miRNA expression. Moreover down-regulation of miR143 protects L02 cells from apoptosis and initiates an adaptive process by adjusting the expression of HK2 ADRB1 and apoptosis-related proteins.
Preterm birth infants are more susceptible to oxidative stress and aftermaths unwanted outcomes such as DNA damage due to hyperoxic stress. In this study, we compared the DNA strand breaks as one of the results of DNA oxidation in white blood cells, malondialdehyde (oxidative stress marker), catalase and superoxide dismutase activity, and total antioxidant capacity (markers of antioxidant defense) in a cord blood plasma of a group of preterm (n=25) and full term births (n=25). The primary DNA damage and plasma oxidative stress markers were significantly higher in a preterm group (p<0.05). Cord plasma activity of superoxide dismutase was significantly lower in preterm infants (p≤0.001). However, there were no significant differences in the cord blood total antioxidant capacity, catalase activity and malondialdehyde in preterm and term infants. Among the oxidative stress markers, the malondialdehyde concentration showed the strongest effect size (1.54; 95%CI: 0.9-2.17). For comet parameters, the most powerful effect size was observed for tail length (5.24; 95% CI: 4.05-6.42). However, tail DNA percent and tail moment were also significantly higher in cases compared to controls. Significant negative correlation was observed between comet assay parameters and birth weight and gestational age when all cases and controls entered into the analysis. There was no significant association between the levels of oxidative stress markers and early DNA damage in cord blood plasma with future nutritional tolerance in preterm infants. In the present study, the primary DNA damage and plasma oxidative stress markers significantly were increased in a preterm group. Preterm babies are more prone to the outcomes related to the early DNA damage. Tail DNA percent does not depend on experimental conditions as other parameters (tail length and thus also tail moment) and can be used for comparison with other studies.
This study evaluated the protective effect of flaxseed oil (FO) and flaxseed lignan secoisolariciresinol diglucoside (SDG) against oxidative stress in rats with metabolic syndrome (MS). 48 rats were allocated into the following 6 groups: Groups 1 (control), 5 (FO), and 6 (SDG) received water and were treated daily orally with saline, FO, and SDG, respectively. Groups 2 (MS), 3 (MS+FO), and 4 (MS+SDG) received 30% fructose in drinking water for MS induction and were treated daily orally with saline, FO, and SDG, respectively. After 30 d, animals were sacrificed, and blood was collected for biochemical and oxidative analysis. Body weight was recorded weekly. Systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured before and after treatment. Fructose could produce MS and oxidative stress. FO and SDG prevented changes in SBP, lipids, and glucose. FO and SDG prevented oxidative damage to lipids, and only FO prevented oxidative damage to proteins associated to MS. FO and SDG improved enzymatic antioxidants defenses and reduced glutathione levels, which was greater with SDG. Total polyphenol levels were enhanced in groups that received SDG. Thus, the results of this study demonstrated that treatment with a 30% fructose solution for 30 d is effective for MS induction and the oxidative stress is involved in the pathophysiology of MS induced by fructose-rich diets. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the antioxidant effects attributed to flaxseed are mainly due to its high lignan content especially that of SDG, suggesting that this compound can be used in isolation to prevent oxidative stress associated with MS.
We report that the antioxidant effects attributed to flaxseed are mainly due to its high lignan content, especially that of secoisolariciresinol diglucoside. This is significant because suggests that this compound can be used in isolation to prevent oxidative stress associated with MS. Furthermore, this study was the only one to perform a comparison of the abilities of 2 components of flaxseed to protect against oxidative stress in an MS model, which brings a great advance in the medicine's field, since it indicates another alternative for improve the health and the quality of life of patients with this disorder.
<i>Campylobacter jejuni</i> is a leading cause of foodborne illnesses worldwide. As a microaerophilic organism, <i>C. jejuni</i> must be able to defend against oxidative stress encountered both in the host and in the environment. How <i>Campylobacter</i> utilizes a mutation-based mechanism for adaptation to oxidative stress is still unknown. Here we present a previously undescribed phenotypic and genetic mechanism that promotes the emergence of oxidative stress-resistant mutants. Specifically, we showed that a naturally occurring mutator phenotype, resulting from a loss of function mutation in the DNA repair enzyme MutY, increased oxidative stress resistance (OX<sup>R</sup>) in <i>C. jejuni</i> We further demonstrated that MutY malfunction did not directly contribute to the OX<sup>R</sup> phenotype but increased the spontaneous mutation rate in the peroxide regulator gene <i>perR</i>, which functions as a repressor for multiple genes involved in oxidative stress resistance. Mutations in PerR resulted in loss of its DNA binding function and derepression of PerR-controlled oxidative stress defense genes, thereby conferring an OX<sup>R</sup> phenotype and facilitating <i>Campylobacter</i> survival under oxidative stress. These findings reveal a new mechanism that promotes the emergence of spontaneous OX<sup>R</sup> mutants in bacterial organisms.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Although a mutator phenotype has been shown to promote antibiotic resistance in many bacterial species, little is known about its contribution to the emergence of OX<sup>R</sup> mutants. This work describes the link between a mutator phenotype and the enhanced emergence of OX<sup>R</sup> mutants as well as its underlying mechanism involving DNA repair and mutations in PerR. Since DNA repair systems and PerR are well conserved in many bacterial species, especially in Gram positives, the same mechanism may operate in multiple bacterial species. Additionally, we developed a novel method that allows for rapid quantification of spontaneous OX<sup>R</sup> mutants in a bacterial population. This method represents a technical innovation and may also be applied to other bacterial species. These findings significantly advance our understanding of bacterial mechanisms for survival under oxidative stress.
Department of Defense lands are essential for providing important habitat for threatened, endangered, and at-risk species (TER-S). However, there is little information on the effects of military-related contaminants on TER-S on these lands in field situations. Thus, this study examined genotoxicity and oxidative stress in gopher tortoises (Gopherus polyphemus) on Camp Shelby, MS-the largest known population of this species, which is listed as an "endangered species" in Mississippi and a "threatened species" by the U.S. government. Blood was collected from tortoises at 19 different sites on the base with different levels of habitat quality (high-quality and low-quality habitat) and military activity (high, low, and no military activity). Oxidative stress was quantified as lipid peroxidation and GSSG/GSH ratios, while DNA damage was determined using flow cytometry. Our results suggest that: (1) for tortoises residing in low-quality habitats, oxidative stress and DNA damage increased with increasing military activity, while in high-quality habitats, oxidative stress and DNA damage decreased with increasing military activity; (2) in the absence of military activity, tortoises in high-quality habitat had higher levels of oxidative stress and DNA damage than those in low-quality habitat, and (3) there were interactions between military activity, habitat quality, and landuse in terms of the amount of observable DNA damage and oxidative stress. In particular, on high-quality habitat, tortoises from areas with high levels of military activity had lower levels of oxidative stress and DNA damage biomarkers than on reference sites. This may represent a compensatory or hormetic response. Conversely, on low-quality habitats, the level of oxidative stress and DNA damage was lower on the reference sites. Thus, tortoises on higher-quality habitats may have a greater capacity for compensatory responses. In terms of management implications, it is suggested that low quality habitats should be a higher priority for remediation, and lower priority for conducting military activities.
Paracetamol (APAP) is one of the most widely used and popular over-the-counter analgesic and antipyretic drugs in the world when used at therapeutic doses. APAP overdose can cause severe liver injury, liver necrosis and kidney damage in human beings and animals. Many studies indicate that oxidative stress is involved in the various toxicities associated with APAP, and various antioxidants were evaluated to investigate their protective roles against APAP-induced liver and kidney toxicities. To date, almost no review has addressed the APAP toxicity in relation to oxidative stress. This review updates the research conducted over the past decades into the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), reactive nitrogen species (RNS), and oxidative stress as a result of APAP treatments, and ultimately their correlation with the toxicity and metabolism of APAP. The metabolism of APAP involves various CYP450 enzymes, through which oxidative stress might occur, and such metabolic factors are reviewed within. The therapeutics of a variety of compounds against APAP-induced organ damage based on their anti-oxidative effects is also discussed, in order to further understand the role of oxidative stress in APAP-induced toxicity. This review will throw new light on the critical roles of oxidative stress in APAP-induced toxicity, as well as on the contradictions and blind spots that still exist in the understanding of APAP toxicity, the cellular effects in terms of organ injury and cell signaling pathways, and finally strategies to help remedy such against oxidative damage.
Bovine mastitis, an inflammation of the udder, results in reduced milk production and poor milk quality. Mastitis is usually, but not always, a response to pathogen infection. High milk yield can produce oxidative stress in the mammary tissue. High milk yield is also known to be associated with bovine mastitis. Thus, in the current study, we hypothesised that oxidative stress increases inflammatory responses in bovine mammary cells. To examine the hypothesis, we produced cellular oxidative stress and investigated resulting inflammatory responses in bovine mammary alveolar cells (MAC-T). To produce oxidative stress, cells were treated with the reactive oxygen species (ROS; e.g., superoxide anion)-producing agent, menadione (MD; 0-10 µm; 6 h). To ensure the ROS-induced responses, cells were pretreated with an antioxidant NAC (0-10 mm; 1 h). Results showed that MD elevated intracellular ROS levels and protein expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), a biomarker of inflammation. Pretreatment of cells with NAC attenuated MD-induced COX-2 expression by scavenging intracellular ROS and enhancing intracellular glutathione levels. MD-induced COX-2 expression was mediated by activation of extracellular signal receptor-activated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), Akt, and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB). NAC attenuated activation of these intracellular signalling molecules. Treatment of cells with pharmacological inhibitors for ERK1/2, Akt, and NF-κB confirmed the association of these signalling pathways in MD-induced COX-2 expression. These results support our hypothesis that oxidative stress, which is found in high-yielding dairy cows, can produce cellular inflammation in bovine mammary alveolar cells and prevention of oxidative stress can attenuate such pathological responses. This may be relevant for cases of clinical mastitis for which no pathogen can be isolated.
Oxidative stress was predominantly involved in the pathogenesis of acute kidney injury (AKI). Recent studies had reported the protective role of specific microRNAs (miRNAs) against oxidative stress. Hence, we investigated the levels of miR140-5p and its functional role in the pathogenesis of Cisplatin induced AKI. A mice Cisplatin induced-AKI model was established. We found that miR-140-5p expression was markedly increased in mice kidney. Bioinformatics analysis revealed nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2) was a potential target of miR-140-5p, We demonstrated that miR-140-5p did not affect Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) level but directly targeted the 3'-UTR of Nrf2 mRNA and played a positive role in the regulation of Nrf2 expression which was confirmed by luciferase activity assay and western blot. What was more, consistent with miR140-5p expression, the mRNA and protein levels of Nrf2, as well as antioxidant response element (ARE)-driven genes Heme Oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase l (NQO1) were significantly increased in mice kidney tissues. In vitro study, Enforced expression of miR-140-5p in HK2 cells significantly attenuated oxidative stress by decreasing ROS level and increasing the expression of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD). Simultaneously, miR-140-5p decreased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) leakage and improved cell vitality in HK2 cells under Cisplatin-induced oxidative stress. However, HK2 cells transfected with a siRNA targeting Nrf2 abrogated the protective effects of miR-140-5p against oxidative stress. These results indicated that miR-140-5p might exert its anti-oxidative stress function via targeting Nrf2. Our findings showed the novel transcriptional role of miR140-5p in the expression of Nrf2 and miR-140-5p protected against Cisplatin induced oxidative stress by activating Nrf2-dependent antioxidant pathway, providing a potentially therapeutic target in acute kidney injury.
During perimenopause, oxidative stress increases, which may result in disruption of bone turnover, and consequently in osteoporosis. The use of antioxidants may be an effective nutritional approach to reducing osteoporosis in this period of life. Mate tea (MT) (Ilex paraguariensis), a typical and inexpensive beverage consumed in the Brazilian south-east, Argentina and Uruguay, increases antioxidant defense. Our hypothesis was that MT would decrease oxidative stress and mitigate bone deterioration. To test this, we analyzed oxidative stress markers of bone turnover, and local and systemic markers of bone metabolism of rats during natural perimenopause. Female Wistar rats (aged 16months) in proven perimenopause period received 20mg/kgBW/day of mate tea, by gavage (PM+MT Group, n=10) or water (PM Group, n=10). Female rats aged 4months (AD Group, n=10) received water. The treatment period was four weeks. MT minimized the deterioration of rat microarchitecture, characterized by increase in the bone trabecular area, number of osteocytes and areal bone mineral density. These results were accompanied by a lower level of malondialdehyde, an oxidative stress marker, in femoral tissue homogenate. Plasmatic tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, a typical osteoclastic function marker, decreases after treatment, indicating a decrease in osteoclastic function. MT also modified the immunostaining pattern of bone metabolism markers, decreasing the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligant (RANKL), superoxide dismutase isoform 2 (SOD2) and increasing osteoprotegerin (OPG), a decoy receptor for the RANKL, which positively modulates bone mass. These results suggested MT was capable of decreasing bone resorption by inhibiting the osteoclastogenesis in a RANKL-dependent signaling pathway activated by oxidative stress. Taken together, the results indicated that MT minimized bone loss in perimenopause and this effect is at least partly due to the decrease in oxidative stress, confirming our hypothesis.
The progression of oxidative stress, resulting cell damage, and cell death underlies the etiology of liver damage/dysfunction as a complication of diabetes. High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein, a chromatin-binding nuclear protein and damage-associated molecular pattern molecule, is integral to oxidative stress and signaling pathways regulating cell death and cell survival. We previously found that in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats, reduction of oxidative stress after melatonin administration lowered necrotic cell death and increased expression of HMGB1 and hepatocellular damage. In the present study, we examined whether alleviation of diabetes-attendant oxidative stress and ensuing change in HMGB1 expression influence the dynamic equilibrium between apoptosis/autophagy and liver damage. We observed that elevated HMGB1 protein levels in diabetic rat liver accompanied increased interactions of HMGB1 with TLR4 and RAGE, and activation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway and Beclin 1-dependent autophagy. The absence of p62 degradation in diabetic rat liver pointed to defective autophagy which was responsible for lower autophagosome/autophagolysosome formation and an increased apoptosis/autophagy ratio. Compared to diabetic rats, in melatonin-treated diabetic rats, the structure of liver cells was preserved, HMGB1/TLR4 interaction and downstream apoptotic signaling were significantly reduced, HMGB1/Beclin 1 colocalization and interactions were augmented and Beclin 1-mediated autophagy, mithophagy in particular, were increased. We concluded that in mild oxidative stress, HMGB1 is cytoprotective, whereas in intense oxidative stress, HMGB1 actions promote cell death and liver damage. Since reduced HMGB1 binds to RAGE but not to TLR4, redox modification of HMGB1 as a mechanism regulating the cross-talk between apoptosis and autophagy in diabetes is discussed.
Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells derived from chorionic villi of human term placentae (pMSCs) produce a unique combination of molecules, which modulate important cellular functions of their target cells while concurrently suppressing their immune responses. These properties make MSCs advantageous candidates for cell-based therapy. Our first aim was to examine the effect of high levels of oxidative stress on pMSC functions. pMSCs were exposed to hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) and their ability to proliferate and adhere to an endothelial cell monolayer was determined. Oxidatively stressed pMSCs maintained their proliferation and adhesion potentials. The second aim was to measure the ability of pMSCs to prevent oxidative stress-related damage to endothelial cells. Endothelial cells were exposed to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, then co-cultured with pMSCs, and the effect on endothelial cell adhesion, proliferation and migration was determined. pMSCs were able to reverse the damaging effects of oxidative stress on the proliferation and migration but not on the adhesion of endothelial cells. These data indicate that pMSCs are not only inherently resistant to oxidative stress, but also protect endothelial cell functions from oxidative stress-associated damage. Therefore, pMSCs could be used as a therapeutic tool in inflammatory diseases by reducing the effects of oxidative stress on endothelial cells.
Oxidative stress has been considered as a major hallmark for the pathogenesis and development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), but still it is debatable whether it is a mere aggregation of inflammatory-induced responses or clinical entity that underlies with various pathophysiological factors. In this regard, the latest studies have shown the increasing trends for the involvement of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress in the pathogenesis and development of T2DM. ROS are highly reactive species and almost all cellular components are chemically changed due to the influence of ROS that ultimately results in the production of lipid peroxidation. Lipid peroxidation is a major causative factor for the development of oxidative stress that leads to overt T2DM and its associated micro- and macro-vascular complications. In this article, we have briefly described the role of various causative factors, transcriptional and metabolic pathways which are responsible to increase the production of oxidative stress, a most pivotal factor for the pathogenesis and development of T2DM. Therefore, we conclude that measurement of oxidative stress biomarkers may be one of the optional tool for the diagnosis and prediction of T2DM. Moreover, the key findings described in this article also provides a new conceptual framework for forthcoming investigations on the role of oxidative stress in pathogenesis of T2DM and drug discovery. J. Cell. Biochem. 118: 3577-3585, 2017. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Oxidative stress occurs when the production of oxidants surpasses the antioxidant capacity in living cells. Oxidative stress is implicated in a number of pathological conditions such as cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases but it also has crucial roles in the regulation of cellular activities. Over the last few decades, many studies have identified significant connections between oxidative stress, inflammation and healing. In particular, increasing evidence indicates that the production of oxidants and the cellular response to oxidative stress are intricately connected to the fate of implanted biomaterials. This review article provides an overview of the major mechanisms underlying the link between oxidative stress and the biocompatibility of biomaterials. ROS, RNS and lipid peroxidation products act as chemo-attractants, signalling molecules and agents of degradation during the inflammation and healing phases. As chemo-attractants and signalling molecules, they contribute to the recruitment and activation of inflammatory and healing cells, which in turn produce more oxidants. As agents of degradation, they contribute to the maturation of the extracellular matrix at the healing site and to the degradation of the implanted material. Oxidative stress is itself influenced by the material properties, such as by their composition, their surface properties and their degradation products. Because both cells and materials produce and react with oxidants, oxidative stress may be the most direct route mediating the communication between cells and materials. Improved understanding of the oxidative stress mechanisms following biomaterial implantation may therefore help the development of new biomaterials with enhanced biocompatibility.
Proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) is the major cause of treatment failure in individuals who undergo surgery for retinal detachment. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells contributes to the pathogenesis of PVR. Oxidative stress is thought to play a role in the progression of retinal diseases including PVR. We have now examined the effects of oxidative stress on the EMT and related processes in the human RPE cell line. We found that H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> induced the contraction of RPE cells in a three-dimensional collagen gel. Analysis of a cytokine array revealed that H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> specifically increased the release of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) from RPE cells. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunoblot analyses showed that H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> increased the expression of MIF in RPE cells. Immunoblot and immunofluorescence analyses revealed that H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> upregulated the expression of α-SMA and vimentin and downregulated that of ZO-1 and N-cadherin. Consistent with these observations, the transepithelial electrical resistance of cell was reduced by exposure to H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> . The effects of oxidative stress on EMT-related and junctional protein expression as well as on transepithelial electrical resistance were inhibited by antibodies to MIF, but they were not mimicked by treatment with recombinant MIF. Finally, analysis with a profiling array for mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling revealed that H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> specifically induced the phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. Our results thus suggest that MIF may play a role in induction of the EMT and related processes by oxidative stress in RPE cells and that it might thereby contribute to the pathogenesis of PVR. Proliferative vitreoretinopathy is a major complication of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, and both oxidative stress and induction of the EMT in RPE cells are thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of this condition. We have now examined the effects of oxidative stress on the EMT and related processes in the human RPE cell line ARPE19. Our results thus implicate MIF in induction of the EMT and related processes by oxidative stress in RPE cells and the regulated expression of EMT markers. They further suggest that MIF may play an important role in the pathogenesis of PVR.
Bacterial nucleoid consists of genome DNA, RNA, and hundreds of nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs). Escherichia coli nucleoid is compacted towards the stationary phase, replacing most log-phase NAPs with the major stationary-phase nucleoid protein, Dps. In contrast, Staphylococcus aureus nucleoid sustains the fiber structures throughout the growth. Instead, the Dps homologue, MrgA, expresses under oxidative stress conditions to clump the nucleoid, but the composition of the clumped nucleoid was elusive.
The staphylococcal nucleoid under oxidative stress was isolated by sucrose gradient centrifugation, and the proteins were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We identified 299 proteins in the nucleoid under oxidative stress, including 113 csNAPs (contaminant-subtracted NAPs). Comparison with the previously identified csNAPs in log- and stationary phase indicated that one fifth of the csNAPs under oxidative stress were the constitutive nucleoid components; importantly, several factors including HU, SarA, FabZ, and ribosomes were sustained under oxidative stress. Some factors (e.g. SA1663 and SA0092/SA0093) with unknown functions were included in the csNAPs list specifically under oxidative stress condition.
Nucleoid constitutively holds Hu, SarA, FabG, and ribosomal proteins even under the oxidative stress, reflecting the active functions of the clumped nucleoid, unlikely to the dormant E. coli nucleoid compacted in the stationary phase or starvation.
The relationship between increased serum enzyme activity of prolidase and increased rate of collagen turnover in the arterial wall has been asserted in previous studies. Collagen reflects much of the strength to the connective tissue involved in the arterial wall. Atherosclerosis is very common vessel disease and oxidative stress plays a pivotal role in the etiopathogenesis. Our objective was to examine the serum enzyme activity of prolidase and its possible relationships with oxidative stress parameters in obese subjects.
Our present study was conducted 27 obese subjects and 26 age-matched healthy control subjects. The serum enzyme activity of prolidase in all study population was evaluated spectrophotometrically. Oxidative stress levels in obese subjects were analyzed with total antioxidant capacity (TAC) and total oxidant status (TOS) as well as oxidative stress index (OSI).
Obese subjects have higher serum TOS and OSI indicators as well as prolidase activity than those in control subjects (for all; p<0.001). Moreover, obese subjects have lower levels of TAC than in those in healthy subjects (p<0.001). In the Pearson's correlation analysis, enzyme activity of prolidase was positively related with TOS (p<0.001, r=0.529) and OSI (p<0.001, r=0.519) as well as BMI (p<0.001, r=0.692) and inversely related with TAC (p<0.05, r=-0.405) in obese subjects.
Increased serum prolidase activity and decreased antioxidant levels are likely to be a results of increased of oxidative stress levels in obese subjects. The significantly correlation between increased oxidative stress and increased prolidase activity may play a pivotal role in etiopathogenesis of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases in obese subjects.
Revascularization therapy relieves myocardial ischemia, but can also result in ischemia-reperfusion injury caused by oxidative stress. However, the biokinetics of oxidative stress after myocardial ischemia-reperfusion are uncertain. This study aimed to evaluate the dynamics of oxidative stress after off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting (OPCAB) by measuring urinary biopyrrin levels. Biopyrrin is an oxidative metabolite of bilirubin thought to reflect oxidative stress, along with reactive nitrogen species (RNS).Methods and Results:The study included 18 patients who underwent OPCAB; patients were divided into effort angina pectoris (EAP; n=11) and unstable angina pectoris (UAP; n=7). Urinary biopyrrin and RNS levels were measured during the perioperative period (≤48 h after surgery). Biopyrrin levels transiently increased 4-12 h post-surgery (early phase), followed by a prolonged increase approximately 24-32 h post-surgery (late phase). The delayed increase in biopyrrin tended to be higher in patients with UAP, with a simultaneous increase in RNS. The patients in the UAP group had generally high pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), although the cardiac index was within a normal range during the delay phase.
The dynamics of biopyrrin levels revealed a biphasic pattern of oxidative stress after OPCAB. Delayed production of oxidative stress may be influenced by preoperative severity of myocardial ischemia and delayed RNS production.
Among S-nitrosothiols showing reversible binding between NO and -SH group, S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) represents potential therapeutics to treat cardiovascular diseases (CVD) associated with reduced nitric oxide (NO) availability. It also induces S-nitrosation of proteins, responsible for the main endogenous storage form of NO. Although oxidative stress parallels CVD development, little is known on the ability of GSNO to restore NO supply and storage in vascular tissues under oxidative stress conditions. Aortic rat smooth muscle cells (SMC) were stressed in vitro with a free radical generator (2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane) dihydrochloride, AAPH). The cellular thiol redox status was reflected through levels of reduced glutathione and protein sulfhydryl (SH) groups. The ability of GSNO to deliver NO to SMC and to induce protein S-nitrosation (investigated via mass spectrometry, MS), as well as the implication of two redox enzymes involved in GSNO metabolism (activity of gamma-glutamyltransferase, GGT, and expression of protein disulfide isomerase, PDI) were evaluated. Oxidative stress decreased both intracellular glutathione and protein -SH groups (53% and 32% respectively) and caused a 3.5-fold decrease of GGT activity, while PDI expression at the plasma membrane was 1.7-fold increased without any effect on extracellular GSNO catabolism. Addition of GSNO (50 μM) increased protein -SH groups and protein S-nitrosation (50%). Mass spectrometry analysis revealed a higher number of S-nitrosated proteins under oxidative stress (83 proteins, vs 68 in basal conditions) including a higher number of cytoskeletal proteins (15, vs 9 in basal conditions) related with cell contraction, morphogenesis and movement. Furthermore, proteins belonging to additional protein classes (cell adhesion, transfer/carrier, and transporter proteins) were S-nitrosated under oxidative stress. In conclusion, higher levels of GSNO-dependent S-nitrosation of proteins from the cytoskeleton and the contractile machinery were identified under oxidative stress conditions. The findings may prompt the identification of suitable biomarkers for the appraisal of GSNO bioactivity in the CVD treatment.
To explore the relevance of and understand the potential mechanisms behind the production of siderophores by clinical isolates of K. pneumoniae and ciprofloxacin (CIP) resistance, we divided the K. pneumoniae isolates into two groups based on bacterial siderophores production: high siderophore-yielding group (39 strains) and low siderophore-yielding group (38 strains). The rate of CIP resistance in K. pneumoniae (27/39 = 69.23%) from the high siderophore-yielding group was significantly higher than that (16/38 = 42.11%) in the low siderophore-yielding group (p < 0.05). Furthermore, we noted that bacterial siderophores production was positively correlating with CIP resistance as indicated by the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC; p < 0.05). However, siderophore-related antibiotic resistance had no relationship with DNA gyrase GyrA mutation (p > 0.05). Siderophore-related antibiotic resistance was accompanied by efflux pump functions, but was not directly relevant to it. Furthermore, we found that the oxidative stress response was significantly lower in high siderophore-yielding strains compared to those isolates which had a low siderophores yield (12.17 vs. 30.91 of average fluorescence value; p < 0.01). There was a consistent inverse correlation between the production of bacterial siderophores and oxidative stress response (p < 0.05). Although CIP induced oxidative stress in both high and low siderophore-yielding strains (p < 0.01), oxidative stress in high siderophore-yielding strains was significantly lower than in low siderophore-yielding strains (p < 0.01). Our data suggest that siderophores of K. pneumoniae clinical isolates promote CIP resistance through inhibition of the bacterial oxidative stress response, indicating that reduction of bacterial oxidative stress could provide a new avenue for control of bacterial drug resistance.
Since oxidative stress involves a variety of cellular changes, no single biomarker can serve as a complete measure of this complex biological process. The analytic technique of structural equation modeling (SEM) provides a possible solution to this problem by modelling a latent (unobserved) variable constructed from the covariance of multiple biomarkers.
Using three pooled datasets, we modelled a latent oxidative stress variable from five biomarkers related to oxidative stress: F<sub>2</sub>-isoprostanes (FIP), fluorescent oxidation products, mitochondrial DNA copy number, γ-tocopherol (Gtoc) and C-reactive protein (CRP, an inflammation marker closely linked to oxidative stress). We validated the latent variable by assessing its relation to pro- and anti-oxidant exposures.
FIP, Gtoc and CRP characterized the latent oxidative stress variable. Obesity, smoking, aspirin use and β-carotene were statistically significantly associated with oxidative stress in the theorized directions; the same exposures were weakly and inconsistently associated with the individual biomarkers.
Our results suggest that using SEM with latent variables decreases the biomarker-specific variability, and may produce a better measure of oxidative stress than do single variables. This methodology can be applied to similar areas of research in which a single biomarker is not sufficient to fully describe a complex biological phenomenon.
Insensitive munitions (IMs) improve soldier safety by decreasing sympathetic detonation during training and use in theatre. IMs are being increasingly deployed, although the environmental effects of IM constituents such as nitroguanidine (NQ) and IM mixture formulations such as IMX-101 remain largely unknown. In the present study, we investigated the acute (96h) toxicity of NQ and IMX-101 to zebrafish larvae (21d post-fertilization), both in the parent materials and after the materials had been irradiated with environmentally-relevant levels of ultraviolet (UV) light. The UV-treatment increased the toxicity of NQ by 17-fold (LC50 decreased from 1323mg/L to 77.2mg/L). Similarly, UV-treatment increased the toxicity of IMX-101 by nearly two fold (LC50 decreased from 131.3 to 67.6mg/L). To gain insight into the cause(s) of the observed UV-enhanced toxicity of the IMs, comparative molecular responses to parent and UV-treated IMs were assessed using microarray-based global transcript expression assays. Both gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) and differential transcript expression analysis coupled with pathway and annotation cluster enrichment were conducted to provide functional interpretations of expression results and hypothetical modes of toxicity. The parent NQ exposure caused significant enrichment of functions related to immune responses and proteasome-mediated protein metabolism occurring primarily at low, sublethal exposure levels (5.5 and 45.6mg/L). Enriched functions in the IMX-101 exposure were indicative of increased xenobiotic metabolism, oxidative stress mitigation, protein degradation, and anti-inflammatory responses, each of which displayed predominantly positive concentration-response relationships. UV-treated NQ had a fundamentally different transcriptomic expression profile relative to parent NQ causing positive concentration-response relationships for genes involved in oxidative-stress mitigation pathways and inhibited expression of multiple cadherins that facilitate zebrafish neurological and retinal development. Transcriptomic profiles were similar between UV-treated versus parent IMX-101 exposures. However, more significant and diverse enrichment as well as greater magnitudes of differential expression for oxidative stress responses were observed in UV-treated IMX-101 exposures. Further, transcriptomics indicated potential for cytokine signaling suppression providing potential connections between oxidative stress and anti-inflammatory responses. Given the overall results, we hypothesize that the increased toxicity of UV-irradiated NQ and the IMX-101 mixture result from breakdown products with elevated potential to elicit oxidative stress.
To assess the role of oxidative stress in mediating adverse outcomes in metabolic syndrome (MetS) and resultant cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (CAN), and to evaluate the effects of lifestyle interventions on measures of oxidative stress and CAN in subjects with MetS.
Pilot study in 25 non-diabetic subjects with MetS (age 49±10years, 76% females) participating in a 24-week lifestyle intervention (supervised aerobic exercise/Mediterranean diet), and 25 age-matched healthy controls. CAN was assessed by cardiovascular reflex tests, heart rate variability (HRV) and PET imaging with sympathetic analog [<sup>11</sup>C] meta-hydroxyephedrine ([<sup>11</sup>C]HED). Specific oxidative fingerprints were measured by liquid-chromatography/mass-spectrometry (LC/MS).
At baseline, MetS subjects had significantly higher oxidative stress markers [3-nitrotyrosine (234±158 vs. 54±47μmol/mol tyrosine), ortho-tyrosine (59±38 vs. 18±10μmol/molphenylalanine, all P<0.0001], and impaired HRV at rest and during deep breathing (P=0.039 and P=0.021 respectively) compared to controls. Twenty-four-week lifestyle intervention significantly reduced all oxidative stress markers (all P<0.01) but did not change any of the CAN measures.
Subjects with MetS present with signs of CAN and increased oxidative stress in the absence of diabetes. The 24-week lifestyle intervention was effective in ameliorating oxidative stress, but did not improve measures of CAN. Larger clinical trials with longer duration are required to confirm these findings.
Oxidative stress is implicated in both depression and anxiety, but it is currently unclear whether this relates to syndromal diagnoses or trans-diagnostic dimensional symptoms. We examined the relationship between oxidative stress and severity of depression and anxiety symptoms in individuals with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD).
Plasma oxidative stress markers F2-isoprostanes and oxidized glutathione (GSSG), and the antioxidant reduced glutathione (GSH), were assessed in 69 physically healthy, medication-free MDD subjects. Symptoms of anxiety and depression were assessed using the Hamilton Anxiety (HAM-A) and Hamilton Depression (HAM-D) Rating Scales. Total HAM-A and HAM-D scores, along with "core" anxiety and depression subscales, and individual HAM-D items "psychic anxiety" and "depressed mood," were related to oxidative stress markers. Analyses controlled for age, sex, BMI, and smoking.
Total HAM-A ratings were positively associated with F2-isoprostanes (β=.26, p=.042) and GSSG (β=.25, p=.049), but not GSH (β=.05, p=.711). Core anxiety severity was positively associated with F2-isoprostanes (β=.34, p=.012) and GSSG, although this did not reach significance (β=.24, p=.074). None of the biological markers were significantly associated with total HAM-D or core depression ratings (all p>.13). Subjects scoring high on "psychic anxiety" had elevated F2-isoprostanes (p=.030) and GSSG (p=.020). This was not seen with "depressed mood" scores (all p>.12).
We assessed peripheral oxidative markers, but their relationship to the brain is unclear.
Oxidative stress is more closely related to anxiety than depression symptoms in MDD. This highlights the importance of relating oxidative stress to specific symptoms and could provide new insights into the biological correlates of affective disorders.
The oxidative stress caused by endothelial injury is involved in intimal hyperplasia (IH) in vein grafts. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can home to injured intima and promote endothelial repair. However, MSC apoptosis is increased accompanied by decreased functional activity under oxidative stress. Thus, we investigate whether tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) can promote the survival and activity of MSCs under oxidative stress to reduce IH more effectively, and establish what role the NF-κB pathway plays in this. In this study, we preconditioned MSCs with TNF-α (<sup>TNF</sup><sup>-α-PC</sup> MSCs) for 24 hrs and measured the activation of the IKK/NF-κB pathway. EdU and transwell assays were performed to assess proliferation and migration of <sup>TNF</sup><sup>-α-PC</sup> MSCs. Apoptosis and migration of <sup>TNF</sup><sup>-α-</sup><sup>PC</sup> MSCs were evaluated in conditions of oxidative stress by analysis of the expression of Bcl-2 and CXCR4 proteins. <sup>TNF</sup><sup>-α-</sup><sup>PC</sup> MSCs were transplanted into a vein graft model, so that cell homing could be tracked, and endothelial apoptosis and IH of vein grafts were measured. The results demonstrated that TNF-α promotes proliferation and migration of MSCs. Furthermore, survival and migration of <sup>TNF</sup><sup>-α-</sup><sup>PC</sup> MSCs under oxidative stress were both enhanced. A greater number of MSCs migrated to the intima of vein grafts after preconditioning with TNF-α, and the formation of neointima was significantly reduced. These effects could be partially abolished by IKK XII (NF-κB inhibitor). All these results indicate that preconditioning with TNF-α can promote survival and migration of MSCs under oxidative stress via the NF-κB pathway and thus attenuate IH of vein grafts.
Present study was designed to assess the hexavalent chromium (Cr<sup>6+</sup>) mediated oxidative stress that induces DNA damage and apoptosis in adult fish, Channa punctatus (35 ± 3.0 g; 14.5 ± 1.0 cm; Actinopterygii). Fishes were maintained in three groups for 15, 30 and 45 d of exposure periods. They were treated with 5% (Group T1) and 10% (Group T2) of 96 h-LC<sub>50</sub> of chromium trioxide (Cr<sup>6+</sup>). Controls were run for the similar duration. A significant (p < 0.05) increment in the activities of antioxidant enzymes, SOD and CAT in liver tissues of the exposed fish evinces the persistence of oxidative stress. A significant (p < 0.05) increase in induction of micronuclei (MN) coupled with transcriptional responses of target genes related to antioxidant enzymes, DNA damage and apoptosis (sod, cat, gsr, nox-1, p53, bax, bcl-2, apaf-1 and casp3a) establishes the impact of oxidative stress due to in vivo, Cr<sup>6+</sup> accumulation in liver as compared to control (0 mg/L), in a dose and exposure-dependent manner. Initially, the increased level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in liver coincided with that of enhanced mRNA expression of antioxidant enzymes, sod, cat, gsr and nox-1 but, later, the overproduction of ROS, after 45 d of exposure of Cr<sup>6+</sup>, resulted in a significant (p < 0.05) up-regulation of p53. Our findings also unveil that the up-regulation of bax, apaf-1 and casp3a and down-regulation of bcl-2 are associated with Cr<sup>6+</sup>-induced oxidative stress mediated-apoptosis in liver of test fish. Aforesaid molecular markers can, thus, be efficiently utilized for bio-monitoring of aquatic regimes and conservation of fish biodiversity.
Age-related cataracts are related to oxidative stress. However, the genome-wide screening of cataract related oxidative stress related genes are not thoroughly investigated. Our study aims to identify cataract regulated miRNA target genes that are related to oxidative stress and to propose a new possible mechanism for cataract formation.
Microarrays were used to determine the mRNA expression profiles of both transparent and cataractous lenses. The results were analyzed by significance analyses performed by the microarray software, and bioinformatics analysis was further conducted using Molecular Annotation System. The Eukaryotic Promoter Database (EPD) was used to retrieve promoter sequences and identify TATA-box motifs. Online resource miRWalk was exploited to screen for validated miRNAs targeting mRNAs related to oxidative stress. RNAhybrid online tool was applied to predict the binding between significantly regulated miRNAs in cataract lenses and target mRNAs.
Oxidative stress pathway was significantly regulated in cataractous lens samples. Pro-oxidative genes were half up-regulated (11/20), with a small number of genes down-regulated (4/20) and the rest of them with no significant change (5/20). Anti-oxidative genes were partly up-regulated (17/69) and partly down-regulated (17/69). Four down-regulated miRNAs (has-miR-1207-5p, has-miR-124-3p, has-miR-204-3p, has-miR-204-5p) were found to target 3' UTR of pro-oxidative genes and could also bind to the TATA-box regions of anti-oxidative genes (with the exception of has-miR-204-3p), whilst two up-regulated miRNAs (has-miR-222-3p, has-miR-378a-3p) were found to target 3' UTR of anti-oxidative genes and could simultaneously bind to the TATA-box regions of pro-oxidative genes.
We propose for the first time a hypothesis that cataract regulated miRNAs could contribute to cataract formation not only by targeting 3' UTR but also by targeting TATA-box region of oxidative stress related genes. This results in the subsequent elevation of pro-oxidative genes and inhibition of anti-oxidative genes. This miRNA-TATA-box/3' UTR-gene-regulation network may contribute to cataract pathogenesis.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are generated in biological processes involving electron transfer reactions and can act in a beneficial or deleterious way. When intracellular ROS levels exceed the cell's anti-oxidant capacity, oxidative stress occurs. In this work, Cu isotope fractionation was evaluated in HepG2 cells under oxidative stress conditions attained in various ways. HepG2 is a well-characterised human hepatoblastoma cell line adapted to grow under high oxidative stress conditions. During a pre-incubation stage, cells were exposed to a non-toxic concentration of Cu for 24 h. Subsequently, the medium was replaced and cells were exposed to one of three different external stressors: H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, tumour necrosis factor α (TNFα) or UV radiation. The isotopic composition of the intracellular Cu was determined by multi-collector ICP-mass spectrometry to evaluate the isotope fractionation accompanying Cu fluxes between cells and culture medium. For half of these setups, the pre-incubation solution also contained N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) as an anti-oxidant to evaluate its protective effect against oxidative stress via its influence on the extent of Cu isotope fractionation. Oxidative stress caused the intracellular Cu isotopic composition to be heavier compared to that in untreated control cells. The H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and TNFα exposures rendered similar results, comparable to those obtained after mild UV exposure. The heaviest Cu isotopic composition was observed under the strongest oxidative conditions tested, i.e., when the cell surfaces were directly exposed to UV radiation without apical medium and in absence of NAC. NAC mitigated the extent of isotope fractionation in all cases.
Iron intoxications induce severe oxidative stress by producing reactive oxygen species (ROS) in cyanobacteria, leading to membrane lipid peroxidation, altered morphology, impaired photosynthesis and other oxidative stress injuries. Given these stresses, mitigation of ROS is a prerequisite for all aerobic organisms. Study of siderophilic cyanobacterium Leptolyngbya strain JSC-1 inhabiting iron-rich hot springs may provide insight into the mechanism of iron homeostasis and alleviation of oxidative stress. In this study, we investigated the morphophysiological and molecular mechanisms enabling this cyanobacterium to cope with iron-induced oxidative stress. Strain JSC-1 biomineralized extracellular iron via an exopolymeric sheath (acting as a first line of defense) and intracellular iron via polyphosphate inclusions (second line of defense), thus minimizing the burden of free ferric ions. Physiological parameters, SOD, CAT and POD activities, bacterioferritin and total protein contents fluctuated in response to iron elevation, displaying a third line of defense to mitigate ROS. Differential gene expression analysis of JSC-1 indicated up-regulation of 94 and 125 genes and down-regulation of 89 and 183 genes at low (4 μM) and high (400 μM) iron concentration, respectively. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were enriched in 100 KEGG pathways and were found to be involved in lipopolysaccharide and fatty acid biosynthesis, starch, sucrose, chlorophyll and other metabolic pathways. Together with metabolic reprogramming (fourth line of defense), JSC-1 established a unique multiline defense system that allows JSC-1 to withstand severe oxidative stress. These findings also provide insight into potential survival strategies of ancient microorganisms inhabiting similar environment present in early earth history.
Oxidative stress and muscle damage occur during exhaustive bouts of exercise, and many runners report pain and soreness as major influences on changes or breaks in training regimens, creating a barrier to training persistence. Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is a sulfur-based nutritional supplement that is purported to have pain and inflammation-reducing effects. To investigate the effects of MSM in attenuating damage associated with physical exertion, this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study evaluated the effects of MSM supplementation on exercise-induced pain, oxidative stress and muscle damage.
Twenty-two healthy females (<i>n</i> = 17) and males (<i>n</i> = 5) (age 33.7 ± 6.9 yrs.) were recruited from the 2014 Portland Half-Marathon registrant pool. Participants were randomized to take either MSM (OptiMSM®) (<i>n</i> = 11), or a placebo (<i>n</i> = 11) at 3 g/day for 21 days prior to the race and for two days after (23 total). Participants provided blood samples for measurement of markers of oxidative stress, and completed VAS surveys for pain approximately one month prior to the race (T<sub>0</sub>), and at 15 min (T<sub>1</sub>), 90 min (T<sub>2</sub>), 1 Day (T<sub>3</sub>), and 2 days (T<sub>4</sub>) after race finish. The primary outcome measure 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanine (8-OHdG) measured oxidative stress. Secondary outcomes included malondialdehyde (MDA) for oxidative stress, creatine kinase (CK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) as measures of muscle damage, and muscle (MP) and joint pain (JP) recorded using a 100 mm Visual Analogue Scale (VAS). Data were analyzed using repeated and multivariate ANOVAs, and simple contrasts compared post-race time points to baseline, presented as mean (SD) or mean change (95% CI) where appropriate.
Running a half-marathon induced significant increases in all outcome measures (<i>p</i> < 0.001). From baseline, 8-OHdG increased significantly at T<sub>1</sub> by 1.53 ng/mL (0.86-2.20 ng/mL CI, <i>p</i> < 0.001) and T<sub>2</sub> by 1.19 ng/mL (0.37-2.01 ng/mL CI, <i>p</i> < 0.01), and fell below baseline levels at T<sub>3</sub> by -0.46 ng/mL (-1.18-0.26 CI, <i>p</i> > 0.05) and T<sub>4</sub> by -0.57 ng/mL (-1.27-0.13 CI, <i>p</i> > 0.05). MDA increased significantly at T<sub>1</sub> by 7.3 μM (3.9-10.7 CI, <i>p</i> < 0.001). Muscle damage markers CK and LDH saw significant increases from baseline at all time-points (<i>p</i> < 0.01). Muscle and joint pain increased significantly from baseline at T<sub>1</sub>, T<sub>2</sub>, and T<sub>3</sub> (<i>p</i> < 0.01) and returned to baseline levels at T<sub>4</sub>. Time-by-treatment results did not reach statistical significance for any outcome measure, however, the MSM group saw clinically significant (Δ > 10 mm) reductions in both muscle and joint pain.
Participation in a half-marathon was associated with increased markers of oxidative stress, muscle damage, and pain. MSM supplementation was not associated with a decrease from pre-training levels of oxidative stress or muscle damage associated with an acute bout of exercise. MSM supplementation attenuated post-exercise muscle and joint pain at clinically, but not statistically significant levels.
Studying heart tissue is critical for understanding and developing treatments for cardiovascular diseases. In this work, we fabricated precisely controlled and biomimetic engineered model tissues to study how cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions influence myocardial cell survival upon exposure to pathological level oxidative stress. Specifically, the interactions of endothelial cells (ECs) and cardiomyocytes (CMs), and the role of hypoxia inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α), with its novel alternative regulator, HIF-1α antisense RNA1 (HIF1A-AS1), in these interactions were investigated. We encapsulated CMs in photo-crosslinkable, biomimetic hydrogels with or without ECs, then exposed to oxidative stress followed by normoxia. With precisely controlled microenvironment provided by the model tissues, cell-cell interactions were restricted to be solely through the secreted factors. CM survival after oxidative stress was significantly improved, in the presence of ECs, when cells were in the model tissues that were functionalized with cell attachment motifs. Importantly, the cardioprotective effect of ECs was reduced when HIF-1α expression was knocked down suggesting that HIF-1α is involved in cardioprotection from oxidative damage, provided through secreted factors conferred by the ECs. Using model tissues, we showed that cell survival increased with increased cell-cell communication and enhanced cell-matrix interactions. In addition, whole genome transcriptome analysis showed, for the first time to our knowledge, a possible role for HIF1A-AS1 in oxidative regulation of HIF-1α. We showed that although HIF1A-AS1 knockdown helps CM survival, its effect is overridden by CM-EC bidirectional interactions as we showed that the conditioned media taken from the CM-EC co-cultures improved CM survival, regardless of HIF1A-AS1 expression.
Cardiovascular diseases, most of which are associated with oxidative stress, is the most common cause of death worldwide. Thus, understanding the molecular events as well as the role of intercellular communication under oxidative stress is upmost importance in its prevention. In this study we used 3D engineered tissue models to investigate the role of HIF-1α and its regulation in EC-mediated cardioprotection. We showed that EC-mediated protection is only possible when there is a bidirectional crosstalk between ECs and CMs even without physical cell-cell contact. In addition, this protective effect is at least partially related to cell-ECM interactions and HIF-1α, which is regulated by HIF1A-AS1 under oxidative stress.
Persistent psychological stress often leads to anxiety disorders and depression. Benzodiazepines and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are popular treatment options but have limited efficacy, supporting the need for alternative treatment. Based on our recent preclinical work suggesting a causal link between neurobehavioral deficits and elevated oxidative stress, we hypothesized that interventions that mitigate oxidative stress can attenuate/overcome neurobehavioral deficits.
Here, we employed the rat social defeat model of psychological stress to determine whether increasing antioxidant levels using grape powder would prevent and/or reverse social defeat-induced behavioral and cognitive deficits. Furthermore, a hippocampal-derived HT22 cell culture model of oxidative stress was employed to identify the individual beneficial constituent(s) of grape powder and the underlying mechanism(s) of action.
Grape powder treatment prevented and reversed social defeat-induced behavioral and cognitive deficits and also decreased social defeat-induced increase in plasma corticosterone and 8-isoprostane (systemic and oxidative stress markers, respectively). And grape powder treatment replenished social defeat-induced depleted pool of key antioxidant enzymes glyoxalase-1, glutathione reducatse-1, and superoxide dismutase. Grape powder constituents, quercetin and resveratrol, were most effective in preventing oxidative stress-induced decreased cellular antioxidant capacity. Grape powder protected oxidative stress-induced cell death by preventing calcium influx, mitochondrial dysfunction, and release of cytochrome c.
Grape powder treatment by increasing antioxidant pool and preventing cell damage and death prevented and reversed social defeat-induced behavioral and cognitive deficits in rats. Quercetin and resveratrol are the major contributors towards beneficial effects of grape powder.
Overexpressing miR529a can enhance oxidative stress resistance by targeting OsSPL2 and OsSPL14 genes that can regulate the expression of their downstream SOD and POD related genes. MicroRNAs are involved in the regulation of plant developmental and physiological processes, and their expression can be altered when plants suffered environment stresses, including salt, oxidative, drought and Cadmium. The expression of microRNA529 (miR529) can be induced under oxidative stress. However, its biological function under abiotic stress responses is still unclear. In this study, miR529a was overexpressed to investigate the function of miR529a under oxidative stress in rice. Our results demonstrated that the expression of miR529a can be induced by exogenous H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and overexpressing miR529a can increase plant tolerance to high level of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, resulting in increased seed germination rate, root tip cell viability, reduced leaf rolling rate and chlorophyll retention. The expression of oxidative stress responsive genes and the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and peroxidase (POD) were increased in miR529a overexpression plant, which could help to reduce redundant reactive oxygen species (ROS). Furthermore, only OsSPL2 and OsSPL14 were targeted by miR529a in rice seedlings, repressing their expression in miR529aOE plants could lead to strengthen plant tolerance to oxidation stress. Our study provided the evidence that overexpression of miR529a could strengthen oxidation resistance, and its target genes OsSPL2 and OsSPL14 were responsible for oxidative tolerance, implied the manipulation of miR529a and its target genes regulation on H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> related response genes could improve oxidative stress tolerance in rice.
Renovascular hypertension (RVH) is a result of renal artery stenosis, which is commonly due to astherosclerosis. In this study, we aimed to clarify the central and peripheral effects of ghrelin on the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) in a rat model of RVH.
RVH was induced in rats by partial subdiaphragmatic aortic constriction. Experiment A was designed to assess the central effect of ghrelin via the intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of ghrelin (5 μg/kg) or losartan (0.01 mg/kg) in RVH rats. Experiment B was designed to assess the peripheral effect of ghrelin via the subcutaneous (SC) injection of ghrelin (150 μg/kg) or losartan (10 mg/kg) for 7 consecutive days. Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), heart rate, plasma renin activity (PRA), and oxidative stress markers were measured in all rats. In addition, angiotensin II receptor type 1 (AT1R) concentration was measured in the hypothalamus of rats in Experiment B.
RVH significantly increased brain AT1R, PRA, as well as the brain and plasma oxidative stress. Either SC or ICV ghrelin or losartan caused a significant decrease in MAP with no change in the heart rate. Central ghrelin or losartan caused a significant decrease in brain AT1R with significant alleviation of the brain oxidative stress. Central ghrelin caused a significant decrease in PRA, whereas central losartan caused a significant increase in PRA. SC ghrelin significantly decreased PRA and plasma oxidative stress, whereas SC losartan significantly increased PRA and decreased plasma oxidative stress.
The hypotensive effect of ghrelin is mediated through the amelioration of oxidative stress, which is induced by RAS centrally and peripherally.
HIV and TB infections are both associated with elevated oxidative stress parameters. Anti-oxidant supplementation may offer beneficial effects in positively modulating oxidative stress parameters in HIV and HIV-TB infected patients. We investigated the effects of vitamin A and C supplementation on oxidative stress in HIV infected and HIV-TB co-infected subjects.
40 HIV/TB co-infected and 50 HIV mono-infected patients were divided into 2 equal groups. Participants provided demographic information and blood was collected to determine oxidative stress parameters before and after vitamin A (5000 IU) and C (2600 mg) supplementation for 1 month.
There was a significantly (p < 0.05) higher level of Malondialdehyde (MDA) at baseline for HIV infected subjects compared with HIV-TB co-infected subjects. There was a significantly (p < 0.05) lower level of MDA and higher level of Catalase (CAT) in subjects administered supplementation compared to subjects without supplementation for the HIV infected group. There was a significantly lower level of Reduced Glutathione (GSH), Superoxide Dismutase (SOD) and higher level of MDA after one month of supplementation compared with baseline levels for HIV/TB co infected subjects. A similar result was also obtained for the HIV mono-infected groups which had a significantly lower level of SOD, MDA and CAT compared to the baseline. There was a significantly lower level of GSH and SOD, and higher level of MDA after supplementation compared with the baseline for HIV/TB co-infected subjects. Comparing the indices at baseline and post no-supplementation in HIV/TB co-infection showed no significant differences in the oxidative stress parameters.
HIV/TB co-infection and HIV mono-infection seems to diminish the capacity of the anti-oxidant system to control oxidative stress, however exogenous anti-oxidant supplementation appears not to have beneficial roles in positively modulating the associated oxidative stress.
Previous studies have suggested the potential involvement of oxidative stress in gastrointestinal cancers. In light of this, research efforts have been focused on the potential of dietary antioxidant intake to prevent gastrointestinal cancer through the modulation of oxidative stress. Rice bran, a by-product of rice milling, has been shown to contain an abundance of phytochemicals, which are dietary antioxidants. To date, a number of studies have shown the antioxidative effect of rice bran intake, and some demonstrated that such an effect may contribute to gastrointestinal cancer prevention, largely through the antioxidative properties of rice bran phytochemicals. In addition, these phytochemicals were shown to provide protection against cancer through mechanisms linked to oxidative stress, including β-catenin-mediated cell proliferation and inflammation. The present article provides an overview of current evidence for the antioxidative properties of rice bran and its phytochemicals, and for the potential of such properties in cancer prevention through the oxidative-stress-linked mechanisms mentioned above. The article also highlights the need for an evaluation of the effectiveness of rice bran dietary interventions among cancer survivors in ameliorating oxidative stress and reducing the level of gastrointestinal cancer biomarkers, thereby establishing the potential of such interventions among these individuals in the prevention of cancer recurrence.
High intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) cause oxidative stress that results in numerous pathologies, including cell death. Transient potential receptor melastatin-2 (TRPM2), a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-permeable cation channel, is mainly activated by intracellular adenosine diphosphate ribose (ADPR) in response to oxidative stress. Here we studied the role and mechanisms of TRPM2-mediated Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx on oxidative stress-induced cell death in cancer cells. We found that oxidative stress activated the TRPM2-Ca<sup>2+</sup>-CaMKII cascade to inhibit early autophagy induction, which ultimately led to cell death in TRPM2 expressing cancer cells. On the other hand, TRPM2 knockdown switched cells from cell death to autophagy for survival in response to oxidative stress. Moreover, we found that oxidative stress activated the TRPM2-CaMKII cascade to further induce intracellular ROS production, which led to mitochondria fragmentation and loss of mitochondrial membrane potential. In summary, our data demonstrated that oxidative stress activates the TRPM2-Ca<sup>2+</sup>-CaMKII-ROS signal loop to inhibit autophagy and induce cell death.
Physical activity, by definition, is any skeletal muscle body movement that results in energy expenditure. In the last few decades, a plethora of scientific evidences have accumulated and confirmed the beneficial role of physical activity as a modifiable risk factor for a wide variety of chronic diseases including cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), diabetes mellitus and cancer, among others. Autoimmune diseases are a heterogeneous group of chronic diseases, which occur secondary to loss of self-antigen tolerance. With the advent of biological therapies, better outcomes have recently been noted in the management of autoimmune diseases. Nonetheless, recent research highlights the salient role of modifiable behaviors such as physical inactivity on various aspects of the immune system and autoimmune diseases. Physical activity leads to a significant elevation in T-regulatory cells, decreased immunoglobulin secretion and produces a shift in the Th1/Th2 balance to a decreased Th1 cell production. Moreover, physical activity has been proven to promote the release of IL-6 from muscles. IL-6 released from muscles functions as a myokine and has been shown to induce an anti-inflammatory response through IL-10 secretion and IL-1β inhibition. Physical activity has been shown to be safe in most of autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), multiple sclerosis (MS), inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), as well as others. Additionally, the incidence of RA, MS, IBD and psoriasis has been found to be higher in patients less engaged in physical activity. As a general trend, patients with autoimmune diseases tend to be less physically active as compared to the general population. Physically active RA patients were found to have a milder disease course, better cardiovascular disease (CVD) profile, and improved joint mobility. Physical activity decreases fatigue, enhances mood, cognitive abilities and mobility in patients with MS. In SLE patients, enhanced quality of life and better CVD profile were documented in more physically active patients. Physically active patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus have a decreased risk of autonomic neuropathy and CVD. Both fibromyalgia and systemic sclerosis patients report decreased disease severity, pain, as well as better quality of life with more physical activity. Further, SSc patients improve their grip strength, finger stretching and mouth opening with increased level of exercise. The purpose of this paper is to review the clinical evidence regarding the safety, barriers to engagement, and impact of physical activity on autoimmune diseases.
The etiology of autoimmune diseases is due to a combination of genetic predisposition and environmental factors that alter the expression of immune regulatory genes through various mechanisms including epigenetics. Both humoral and cellular elements of the adaptive immune system play a role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases and the presence of autoantibodies have been detected in most but not all autoimmune diseases before the appearance of clinical symptoms. In some cases, the presence or levels of these autoantibodies portends not only the risk of developing a corresponding autoimmune disease, but occasionally the severity as well. This observation is intriguing because it suggests that we can, to some degree, predict who may or may not develop autoimmune diseases. However, the role of autoantibodies in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, whether they actually affect disease progression or are merely an epiphenomenon is still not completely clear in many autoimmune diseases. Because of these gaps in our knowledge, the ability to accurately predict a future autoimmune disease can only be considered a relative risk factor. Importantly, it raises the critical question of defining other events that may drive a patient from a preclinical to a clinical phase of disease.
Helminths have accompanied human throughout history by releasing immune-evasion molecules that could counteract an aberrant immune response within the host. In the past decades, helminth infections are becoming less prevalent possibly due to the developed sanitation. Meanwhile, the incidence of autoimmune diseases is increasing, which cannot be exclusively explained by the changes of susceptibility genes. While the hygiene hypothesis casts light on the problem. The infections of helminths are believed to interact with and regulate human immunity with the byproduct of suppressing the autoimmune diseases. Thus, helminths are potential to treat or cure the autoimmune diseases. The therapeutic progresses and possible immune suppression mechanisms are illustrated in the review. The helminths that are studied most intensively include Heligmosomoides polygyrus, Hymenolepis diminuta, Schistosoma mansoni, Trichinella spiralis, and Trichuris suis. Special attentions are paid on the booming animal models and clinical trials that are to detect the efficiency of immune-modulating helminth-derived molecules on autoimmune diseases. These trials provide us with a prosperous clinical perspective, but the precise mechanism of the down-regulatory immune response remains to be clarified. More efforts are needed to be dedicated until these parasite-derived immune modulators could be used in clinic to treat or cure the autoimmune diseases under a standard management.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) plays a crucial role in both innate and adaptive immunity. Emerging evidence indicates that HIF-1α is associated with the inflammation and pathologic activities of autoimmune diseases. Areas covered: Considering that the types of autoimmune diseases are complicated and various, this review aims to cover the typical kinds of autoimmune diseases, discuss the molecular mechanisms, biological functions and expression of HIF-1α in these diseases, and further explore its therapeutic potential. Expert opinion: Inflammation and hypoxia are interdependent. HIF-1α as a key regulator of hypoxia, exerts a crucial role in the balance between Th17 and Treg, and involves in the inflammation and pathologic activities of autoimmune diseases. Although there are many challenges remaining to be overcome, targeting HIF-1α could be a promising strategy for autoimmune diseases therapies.
Scabies is a commonly occurring infectious immune-mediated inflammatory skin disease. Immune-mediated inflammatory processes are also observed in autoimmune diseases. There have been very few previous studies; however, that have investigated the possible association between scabies and autoimmune diseases. To address this research gap, we conducted a nationwide population-based cohort study that included a total of 4481 scabies patients and 16,559 control subjects matched by gender, age, insured region, urbanization and income. We tracked both cohorts for a 7-year period to identify the incidence of autoimmune diseases in both groups during that follow-up period. Relatedly, a Cox regression analysis was performed to calculate and compare the hazard ratio (HR) for autoimmune diseases of both groups. An overall increased risk for 19 autoimmune diseases was observed in the scabies patients, with an adjusted HR (aHR) of 1.14 (95% CI 1.04-1.25). Compared with the control group, the scabies patients exhibited increased risks of hypersensitivity vasculitis (aHR 5.44, 95% CI 1.64-18.07), dermatomyositis (aHR 4.91, 95% CI 1.80-13.38), polyarteritis nodosa (aHR 2.89, 95% CI 1.46-5.73), systemic lupus erythematosus (aHR 2.73, 95% CI 1.33-5.64), psoriasis (aHR 2.31, 95% CI 1.85-2.88), myasthenia gravis (aHR 2.01, 95% CI 1.31-3.12), type 1 diabetes mellitus (aHR 1.93, 95% CI 1.53-2.44), pernicious anemia (aHR 1.92, 95% CI 1.42-2.61), and rheumatoid arthritis (aHR 1.43, 95% CI 1.12-1.83). In conclusion, the associations between scabies and a variety of autoimmune diseases may exist. Further studies are needed to clarify the shared etiologies and relationships between scabies and autoimmune diseases.
To investigate the impact of comorbid diseases on rheumatoid arthritis (RA) outcome.All patients diagnosed with RA since 2006, who were registered in our local Danbio registry, were included in this cohort study. Patients' demographics, serology results, and Disease Activity Score in 28 joints-C-reactive protein (DAS28-CRP) at the time of diagnosis and after 4 months of treatment initiation were collected. Patients' electronic hospital records were evaluated for a positive history of thyroid diseases, diabetes mellitus, primary hyperparathyroidism, vitamin B12 deficiency, and the presence of other diagnosed autoimmune diseases.1035 RA patients were included. The observed prevalence of thyroid diseases was 11.8%, DM 10.4%, primary hyperparathyroidism 2.8%, vitamin B12 deficiency 5.8%, and other diagnosed autoimmune diseases 1.6%. There were significant associations between presence of thyroid diseases and female gender (P < .001); DM and greater age (P < .001); primary hyperparathyroidism and longer disease duration (P = .002); other diagnosed autoimmune diseases and antinuclear antibody positivity (P < .001). RA patients with thyroid diseases (P = .001) and other comorbid autoimmune diseases (P < .001) had significantly poorer initial response to the RA treatment compared to patients with isolated RA.Univariate analyses revealed that age, the presence of thyroid diseases, the presence of other diagnosed autoimmune diseases and DAS28-CRP at the time of diagnosis were significantly associated with ΔDAS28-CRP. Additionally, multivariate analysis demonstrated that ΔDAS28-CRP deterioration was significantly correlated to the presence of thyroid diseases (unstandardized regression coefficient (standard error); -0.188 (0.088), P = .030) and the presence of other diagnosed autoimmune diseases (-0.537 (0.208), P = .010).RA patients are at increased risk of specific comorbidities with possible impact on the treatment outcome. To improve this situation, periodic assessment of comorbidities should be considered.
It is not known if the incidences of autoimmune diseases are higher in individuals living with HIV infection or AIDS. Our study investigated the incidences of autoimmune diseases among people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) in Taiwan during 2000-2012.
The Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database was used to identify PLWHA. The incidence densities of systemic and organ-specific autoimmune diseases were calculated, and age-adjusted, sex-adjusted and period-adjusted standardised incidence rates (SIRs) were obtained by using two million people from the general population as controls. To examine the effects of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) on the incidence of autoimmune diseases, the incidence densities and SIRs of autoimmune diseases were calculated after stratifying PLWHA by HAART status.
Of the 20 444 PLWHA identified, the overall mean (SD) age was 30.1 (11.0) years; 67.2% of the subjects received HAART. As compared with the general population, SIRs were higher for incident Sjögren syndrome (SIR=1.64; 95% CI 1.24 to 2.13), psoriasis (SIR=2.05; 95% CI 1.67 to 2.48), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (SIR=2.59; 95% CI 1.53 to 4.09), autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (SIR=35.06; 95% CI 23.1 to 51.02) and uveitis (SIR=2.50; 95% CI 2.05 to 3.02), but were lower for incident ankylosing spondyloarthritis (SIR=0.70; 95% CI 0.48 to 0.99). When the effect of HAART on incident autoimmune diseases was considered, PLWHA who received HAART had higher SIRs for psoriasis, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and uveitis, but had lower risks of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and ankylosing spondyloarthritis. In contrast, PLWHA who did not receive HAART had higher SIRs for Sjögren syndrome, psoriasis, RA, SLE, scleroderma, polymyositis, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
PLWHA had higher risks of incident Sjögren syndrome, psoriasis, SLE, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and uveitis.
Autoimmune disease are defined as the attacks on host tissue by the immune system. Several factors, e.g. genetic and environmental triggers (in particular, viruses, bacteria, and other infectious pathogens) play a role in the development of autoimmune diseases. Bacterial infections are related to several autoimmune diseases, e.g. chronic inflammations and demyelination. Nowadays, an estimated 20-30% of the general human population carry Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). This organism can asymptomatically colonize healthy individuals. S. aureus carriers show no sign of infection and can thus spread this bacterium in the community. Several studies investigated the potential involvement of this bacterium as the etiological agents of autoimmune diseases. The present review focused on the role of S. aureus infections in the pathogenesis of autoimmune, inflammatory, and demyelinating diseases. Possible modes of the pathogenic action of bacteria are discussed in association with the ways in which S. aureus can initiate or exacerbate autoimmunity.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of noncoding RNAs and have emerged as critical regulators of gene expression. Some miRNAs play important roles in regulating the function of the immune system and are involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. Recent studies suggested that microRNA-22-3p (miR-22-3p) was able to regulate the function of several types of immune cells and may be involved in the development of autoimmune diseases. We systematically reviewed relevant literatures to provide a comprehensive review of the possible roles of miR-22-3p in autoimmune diseases. Published studies suggest that miR-22-3p can act as a novel regulator of autoimmune diseases via several pathways. More studies are needed to further elucidate the exact roles of miR-22-3p in autoimmune diseases. Treatment strategy targeting miR-22-3p is also a promising therapy for autoimmune diseases.
The aim of this study was to explore whether the interferon (IFN)-γ +874 T/A polymorphism plays a role in modifying the risk of autoimmune diseases.
A meta-analysis was conducted on the association between the IFN-γ +874 T/A polymorphism and autoimmune diseases.
Eighteen studies with a total of 2952 patients and 3832 controls were included in the meta-analysis. The meta-analysis revealed no association between autoimmune diseases and the IFN-γ +874 T allele in all study subjects (odds ratio (OR)=1.023, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.894-1.171, p = 0.738), but stratification by ethnicity indicated an association between the IFN-γ +874 T allele and autoimmune diseases in Latin American subjects (OR = 0.780, 95% CI = 0.629-0.953, p = 0.015). Meta-analysis also revealed an association between autoimmune diseases and the IFN-γ +874 T/A polymorphism in Caucasian and Middle Eastern subjects under a dominant inheritance model (OR = 0.686, 95% CI = 0.489-0.964, p = 0.003; OR = 1.414, 95% CI = 1.102-1.813, p = 0.006). Meta-analysis by autoimmune disease type indicated an association between ITP and the IFN-γ +874 T allele (OR = 1.753, 95% CI = 1.228-2.503, p = 0.002), but not for vasculitis, vitiligo, and auto-immune thyroid disease. Meta-analysis also showed a significant association between the IFN-γ +874 T/A polymorphism and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) under the dominant model (OR = 1.668, 95% CI = 1.114-2.497, p = 0.013).
This meta-analysis indicates that the IFN-γ +874 T/A polymorphism may play a significant role in modifying the risk of autoimmune diseases in Caucasian, Latin American, and Middle Eastern subjects, and in particular shows that the IFN-γ +874 T/A polymorphism is associated with increased genetic susceptibility to idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and SLE.
This study aimed to explore whether functional CYP2D6 polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases.
A meta-analysis was conducted on associations between autoimmune diseases and functional CYP2D6*4 1934 A/G and *3 polymorphisms and CYP2D6 phenotypes.
Twelve studies with 1,472 patients and 3,328 controls were included. Autoimmune disease and the CYP2D6 1934 A allele were significantly associated in the overall group, consistent with the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (OR = 1.227, 95% CI = 1.071-1.406, p = 0.003); stratification by ethnicity indicated that the CYP2D6 1934 A allele and autoimmune diseases were associated in Caucasians (OR = 1.225, 95% CI = 1.010-1.485, p = 0.039). The CYP2D6*3 allele was also associated with autoimmune diseases in Caucasians (OR = 1.977, 95% CI = 1.125-3.472, p = 0.018). Stratified by autoimmune disease type revealed that the CYP2D6 1934 AA genotype was associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; OR = 2.007, 95% CI = 1.170-3.442, p = 0.011) and ankylosing spondylitis (AS; OR = 2.317, 95% CI = 1.422-3.774, p = 0.001). The CYP2D6 PM+IM phenotype was significantly associated with autoimmune diseases in Caucasians (OR = 1.526, 95% CI = 1.038-2.246, p = 0.032) and with SLE (OR = 1.778, 95% CI = 1.249-2.532, p = 0.001).
This meta-analysis indicates that CYP2D6*4 and *3 polymorphisms and the CYP2D6 phenotype are associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases in Caucasians; particularly, the CYP2D6*4 polymorphism and CYP2D6 PM+IM phenotype are risk factors for SLE development.
The relationship between allergy and autoimmune disorders is complex and poorly understood.
We sought to investigate commonalities in genetic loci and pathways between allergy and autoimmune diseases to elucidate shared disease mechanisms.
We meta-analyzed 2 genome-wide association studies on self-reported allergy and sensitization comprising a total of 62,330 subjects. These results were used to calculate enrichment for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously associated with autoimmune diseases. Furthermore, we probed for enrichment within genetic pathways and of transcription factor binding sites and characterized commonalities in variant burden on tissue-specific regulatory sites by calculating the enrichment of allergy SNPs falling in gene regulatory regions in various cells using Encode Roadmap DNase-hypersensitive site data. Finally, we compared the allergy data with those of all known diseases.
Among 290 loci previously associated with 16 autoimmune diseases, we found a significant enrichment of loci also associated with allergy (P = 1.4e-17) encompassing 29 loci at a false discovery rate of less than 0.05. Such enrichment seemed to be a general characteristic for autoimmune diseases. Among the common loci, 48% had the same direction of effect for allergy and autoimmune diseases. Additionally, we observed an enrichment of allergy SNPs falling within immune pathways and regions of chromatin accessible in immune cells that was also represented in patients with autoimmune diseases but not those with other diseases.
We identified shared susceptibility loci and commonalities in pathways between allergy and autoimmune diseases, suggesting shared disease mechanisms. Further studies of these shared genetic mechanisms might help in understanding the complex relationship between these diseases, including the parallel increase in disease prevalence.
Autoimmune disease encompasses an array of conditions with a variety of presentations and the involvement of multiple organs. Though the etiologies of many autoimmune conditions are unclear, uncontrolled inflammatory immune response is believed to be a major cause of disease development and progression. Progranulin (PGRN), an anti-inflammatory molecule with therapeutic effect in inflammatory arthritis, was identified as an endogenous antagonist of TNFα by competitively binding to TNFR. PGRN exerts its anti-inflammatory activity through multiple pathways, including induction of T<sub>reg</sub> differentiation and IL-10 expression and inhibition of chemokine release from macrophages. In addition, the protective role of PGRN has also been demonstrated in osteoarthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and psoriasis. Intriguingly, PGRN was reported to contribute to development of insulin resistance in high-fat diet induced diabetes. Emerging evidences indicate that PGRN may also be associated with various autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematous, systemic sclerosis, multiple sclerosis and Sjogren's syndrome. This review summarizes recent studies of PGRN as a novel target molecule in the field of autoimmune disease, and provides updated information to inspire future studies.
Biological drugs are therapies designed to target a specific molecule of the immune system that have been linked with the development of autoimmune diseases. Areas covered: The BIOGEAS Registry currently collects information about nearly 13,000 reported cases of autoimmune diseases developed in patients exposed to biologics, including more than 50 different systemic and organ-specific autoimmune disorders, of which psoriasis (n=6375), inflammatory bowel disease (n=845), demyelinating CNS disease (n=803), interstitial lung disease (n=519) and lupus (n=369) were the most frequently reported. The main biologics involved were anti-TNF agents in 9133 cases (adalimumab in 4154, infliximab in 3078 and etanercept in 1681), immune checkpoint inhibitors in 913 (ipilimumab in 524 and nivolumab in 225), B-cell targeted therapies in 741 (rituximab in 678), and growth factor inhibitors in 549 cases (bevacizumab in 544). Even though targeting a particular immune molecule may be associated with an excellent clinical response in most patients, an unexpected autoimmune disease may arise in around 8 out of 10,000 exposed patients. Expert opinion: Following the increased use of biologics, the number and diversity of induced autoimmune diseases is increasing exponentially. Management of these disorders will be an increasing clinical challenge in the daily practice in the next years.
Autoimmune diseases are characterized by the abnormal immune response against self-tissue, which are caused by the failure of nature immune homeostasis. Nature immune homeostasis represents the normal state of appropriate immune response to nonself-antigen and unresponsiveness to self-antigens. In normal situation, immune homeostasis is regulated by immunosuppressive signal and immunostimulating signal together. Accumulating data have demonstrated that the adenosinergic pathway played key roles in immune suppression and shield body from an excessive inflammatory response. The deficiency of adenosinergic pathway results in the imbalance between the pro- and anti-inflammatory activities. Thus, researchers pay much attention to the role of adenosinergic pathway in autoimmune diseases development. To date, accumulating data have suggested an important role of adenosinergic pathway-related molecules (i.e., CD39, CD73, ADA, adenosine receptors, etc.) in many types of human autoimmune diseases. More importantly, these findings have presented potential value of adenosinergic pathway analysis to be used for autoimmune diseases diagnosis, monitoring and treatment. In this review, we will provide a comprehensive description of the role of adenosinergic pathway in human autoimmune diseases.
This study aimed to explore whether BANK1 polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases. We conducted a meta-analysis on the associations between the BANK1 rs10516487, rs3733197, and rs17266594 polymorphisms and autoimmune diseases. Twenty-two articles with a total of 22,684 patients and 36,437 controls were included in the meta-analysis. Meta-analysis revealed a significant association between autoimmune diseases and the BANK1 rs10516487 T allele (OR = 1.161, 95% CI = 1.092-1.275, p = 1.9 × 10-6, heterogeneity p<0.001). The analysis also revealed an association between autoimmune diseases and the BANK1 rs3733197 A allele (OR = 1.178, 95% CI = 1.105-1.256, p = 4.5 × 10-7, heterogeneity p = 0.002) and the rs17266594 T allele (OR = 1.189, 95% CI = 1.073-1.315, p = 0.001, heterogeneity p<0.001). Meta-analysis by autoimmune disease type revealed an association between both systemic lupus erythematosus and systemic sclerosis and the BANK1 rs10516487 T allele (OR = 1.294, 95% CI = 1.232-1.360, p<1.0 × 10-8, heterogeneity p = 0.556; OR = 1.102, 95% CI = 1.027-1.183, p = 0.017, heterogeneity p = 0.048). However, meta-analysis failed to indicate an association between the BANK1 rs10516487 T allele and rheumatoid arthritis (RA; OR = 1.006, 95% CI = 1.956-1.058, p = 0.819). This meta-analysis demonstrates that BANK1 rs10516487, rs3733197, and rs17266594 polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases.
With the trend of increasing incidence of autoimmune diseases, laboratories are faced with exponential growth of the requests for tests relating the diagnosis of these diseases. Unfortunately, the lack of laboratory personnel experienced in this specific discipline of laboratory diagnostic, as well as an unawareness of a method limitation often results in confusion for clinicians. The aim was to gain insight into number and type of Croatian laboratories that perform humoral diagnostics with the final goal to improve and harmonize laboratory diagnostics of autoimmune diseases in Croatia.
In order to get insight into current laboratory practice two questionnaires, consisting of 42 questions in total, were created. Surveys were conducted using SurveyMonkey application and were sent to 88 medical biochemistry laboratories in Croatia for the first survey. Out of 33 laboratories that declared to perform diagnostic from the scope, 19 were selected for the second survey based on the tests they pleaded to perform. The survey comprised questions regarding autoantibody hallmarks of systemic autoimmune diseases while regarding organ-specific autoimmune diseases was limited to diseases of liver, gastrointestinal and nervous system.
Response rate was high with 80 / 88 (91%) laboratories which answered the first questionnaire, and 19 / 19 (1.0) for the second questionnaire. Obtained results of surveys indicate high heterogeneity in the performance of autoantibody testing among laboratories in Croatia.
Results indicate the need of creating recommendations and algorithms in order to harmonize the approach to laboratory diagnostics of autoimmune diseases in Croatia.
Chronic cardiomyopathy occurs in 20-40% of the patients with Chagas disease. Autoimmune mechanisms may contribute to its pathogenesis. We diagnosed several cases of systemic autoimmune diseases among Bolivian migrants in Geneva with a high prevalence of Chagas disease.
We tested the hypothesis of a clinical association between systemic autoimmune diseases and Chagas disease, particularly with the development of cardiomyopathy.
We retrospectively searched the medical records of all Bolivian patients visiting Geneva University Hospitals between 2012 and 2015 for diagnosis of Chagas disease or systemic autoimmune diseases.
Of the 2,189 eligible patients, 28 [1.3%; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.9-1.9%] presented with systemic autoimmune disease. The Chagas status was known in 903 (41.3%) patient, of whom 244 (27.0%; 95% CI = 24.2-30.0%) were positive. Eight (28.6%; 95% CI = 15.3-47.1%) of the 28 cases of systemic autoimmune disease had Chagas disease. We found no association between both entities (p = 1.000) or with Chagasic cardiomyopathy (p = 0.729). Moreover, there was no evidence of a temporal relationship between antiparasitic chemotherapy and the development of systemic autoimmune diseases.
Our results do not support a clinical association between chronic Chagas disease and systemic autoimmune diseases. However, prospective studies in areas endemic for Chagas disease should better assess the prevalence of systemic autoimmune diseases and thus a possible relationship with this infection.
Tonsillectomy is a common surgical procedure. Recent evidence suggests that tonsils play an important role in our immune system. We thus hypothesize that individuals with tonsillectomy may face an increased incidence of autoimmune diseases in their later life.
All individuals that had a tonsillectomy in Sweden between 1997 and 2012 were identified from the Swedish Hospital Discharge and Outpatient Register, and were followed until the diagnosis of a set of autoimmune diseases. Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) were used to calculate the risk of autoimmune diseases as compared to the general population.
A total of 179,875 individuals received a tonsillectomy in Sweden and 5357 of them were subsequently diagnosed with autoimmune diseases, giving an overall SIR of 1.34 (95%CI 1.30-1.37). For specific autoimmune diseases, 16 of them showed a significantly increased SIR, ranging between 1.21 and 2.97. The increased incidence was largely consistent irrespective of gender, age at operation, and underlying indications of tonsillectomy.
The incidence of a group of autoimmune diseases was higher in individuals operated with a tonsillectomy. Immune dysfunction due to tonsillectomy may partly explain the observed association. However, the underlying mechanisms need to be explored in future studies.
There has been great interest in recent years to take advantage of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to treat end-stage liver disease. This study is aimed to evaluate clinical therapeutic effects of allogeneic MSC transplantation in liver cirrhosis caused by autoimmune diseases.
The enrolled patients with liver cirrhosis were assigned to receive allogeneic MSC infusions through a peripheral vein. The primary objective of this study was to assess the safety and effectiveness of MSCT in patients with autoimmune diseases-induced cirrhosis. Secondary endpoints were to assess changes in the Models of End Stage Liver Disease (MELD) scores and liver functions after the transplantation.
A total of 26 patients were enrolled. Of these, 23 patients received umbilical cord MSCT, two received cord blood MSCT and one received bone marrow MSCT. Three patents died of the complications caused by cirrhosis and two patients received liver transplantation after MSCT. Four patients were lost to follow-up. The mean of alanine transaminase values decreased 6 months, 1 and 2 years after the transplantation, but there were no statistical significance. The mean value of total bilirubin decreased at 6 months and 1 year follow-up. Average serum albumin levels improved at 6 months, 1 and 2 years follow-up. The mean value at 2 years increased significantly compared with the baseline value. A lowering of prothrombin time was seen at 6 months after MSCT. MELD score improved at 6 months, 1 and 2 years of follow-up. No serious adverse events were observed during or 24 h after infusions of MSCs in any of the 26 patients with liver cirrhosis.
Based on this clinical trial, allogeneic MSCT through the peripheral vein probably is safe and seemingly has beneficial effect in patients with liver cirrhosis. Therefore, allogeneic MSCT is a potential option for treatment of liver cirrhosis caused by autoimmune diseases. Further studies with higher numbers of patients are warranted to better clarify the impact and mechanisms of MSCT in liver cirrhosis.
There are many autoimmune diseases that are recognized in domestic animals. The descriptions of diseases provide examples of the magnitude of immune targets and the variable nature of autoimmune diseases. Other autoimmune diseases that are recognized in dogs, cats, and horses include immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, VKH (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada) ocular disease (dogs), and Evans syndrome (which includes both immune-mediated anemia and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia).
The human glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3C1) is considered to play a role in the differences and sensitivities of the glucocorticoid response in individuals with autoimmune diseases. The objective of this study was to examine by means of a systematic review previous findings regarding allelic variants of NR3C1 in relation to the risk of developing systemic autoimmune diseases.
Studies that analysed the genotype distribution of NR3C1 allelic variants among patients with systemic autoimmune diseases were retrieved. A meta-analysis was conducted with a random effects model. Odds ratios (ORs) and their confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. In addition, sub-analysis by ethnicity, sensitivity analysis and tests for heterogeneity of the results were performed.
Eleven studies met the inclusion criteria for meta-analysis. We found no evidence that the analysed NR3C1 polymorphisms, rs6198, rs56149945, and rs6189/rs6190, modulate the risk of developing a systemic autoimmune disease. Nonetheless, a protective role for the minor allele of rs41423247 was found among Caucasians (OR=0.78; 95% CI: 0.65, 0.92; P=0.004). A subgroup analysis according to underlying diseases revealed no significant association either for Behçet's disease or rheumatoid arthritis, while correlations between NR3C1 polymorphisms and disease activity or response to glucocorticoids could not be evaluated due to insufficient data.
There is no clear evidence that the analysed NR3C1 allelic variants confer a risk for developing systemic autoimmune diseases although the minor G allele of rs41423247 may be protective among Caucasians.
Autoimmune diseases in children are rare and can be difficult to diagnose.  Single causative genes have been identified for some pediatric autoimmune diseases. Such orphan diseases may not be diagnosed properly due to the variability of patients' phenotypes. Guidelines for the diagnostic process need to be developed. Fifteen patients with uncharacterized childhood autoimmune diseases with lymphoproliferation that had negative testing for autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome were subjected to whole-exome sequencing to identify genes associated with these conditions. Five causative genes, CTLA4, STAT3, TNFAIP3, IKZF1, and PSTPIP1, were identified. These genes should be considered as candidates for uncharacterized childhood autoimmune diseases with lymphoproliferation.
The immune response is complex, multifactorial, individualized and often unpredictable. There are multiple interconnected systems that allow a balance between physiological autoreactive processes and pathological autoimmunity with consequent organ-specific or systemic autoimmune disease. Based on the concept of the autoimmunity mosaic, up to 50% of autoimmune disorders do not have a clear etiological factor. In order to achieve a clear understanding of the different systems that influence the development of autoimmune diseases, the clinical auto-immunologist needs a dynamic and comprehensive vision of all interconnected pathways that maintain a precise balance in the organism. This has been and will remain a challenge. Understanding the different pathophysiological processes of these diseases will be the basis for predicting different clinical spectra and has the potential to offer innovative therapeutic approaches. This paper offers a practical overview of the bidirectional communication between the immune and endocrine system and the influence this has on the development of autoimmune diseases.
Genetic predisposition could be assumed to be causing clustering of autoimmunity in individuals and families. We tested whether HLA and non-HLA loci associate with such clustering of autoimmunity. We included 1,745 children with type 1 diabetes from the Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register. Data on personal or family history of autoimmune diseases were collected with a structured questionnaire and, for a subset, with a detailed search for celiac disease and autoimmune thyroid disease. Children with multiple autoimmune diseases or with multiple affected first- or second-degree relatives were identified. We analysed type 1 diabetes related HLA class II haplotypes and genotyped 41 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) outside the HLA region. The HLA-DR4-DQ8 haplotype was associated with having type 1 diabetes only whereas the HLA-DR3-DQ2 haplotype was more common in children with multiple autoimmune diseases. Children with multiple autoimmune diseases showed nominal association with RGS1 (rs2816316), and children coming from an autoimmune family with rs11711054 (CCR3-CCR5). In multivariate analyses, the overall effect of non-HLA SNPs on both phenotypes was evident, associations with RGS1 and CCR3-CCR5 region were confirmed and additional associations were implicated: NRP1, FUT2, and CD69 for children with multiple autoimmune diseases. In conclusion, HLA-DR3-DQ2 haplotype and some non-HLA SNPs contribute to the clustering of autoimmune diseases in children with type 1 diabetes and in their families.
Autoimmune diseases are characterized by aberrant immune responses against healthy cells and tissues. However, the exact mechanisms underlying the development of these conditions remain unknown. CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) are a subset of mature T cells which have an important role in maintaining immune homeostasis and preventing autoimmune diseases. Forkhead box p3 (Foxp3), a member of the fork head transcription factor family, is recognized as a marker of CD4+CD25+ Tregs. The decreased number and/or function of CD4+CD25+ Tregs in peripheral blood and related tissues has been demonstrated in systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis, and other autoimmune diseases, which are at least partially regulated by epigenetic mechanisms. Epigenetics refers to the study of potentially heritable alterations in gene expression without underlying changes of the nucleotide sequence, mainly including DNA methylation, histone modification, and microRNAs (miRNAs). For example, DNA methylation status of CpG islands on the Foxp3 gene, which may be affected by normal aging and regulated by environmental factors, plays an important role in modulating the homeostasis of Foxp3 expression in Tregs. Foxp3 gene in Tregs also shows distinct acetylation and trimethylation levels of histone H3 and H4 when compared with effector T cells, leading to an open chromatin structure. MicroRNAs such as miR-155, miR-126, and miR-10a also exert an important influence on the differentiation, development, and immunological functions of Tregs. Aberrant epigenetic modifications affecting Foxp3 and other key genes in Tregs contribute to disease activity and tissue inflammation in autoimmune diseases, which holds great potential for providing novel targets for epigenetic therapies. Advances in research into the epigenetic regulation of CD4+CD25+ Tregs may also lead to the identification of new epigenetic biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis.
Autoimmune diseases contain a large number of pathologies characterized by various factors that contribute to a breakdown in self-tolerance. Cytokine-mediated immunity plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of varieties of autoimmune diseases. Recent studies reveal that interleukin-35 (IL-35), a newly identified cytokine of IL-12 family, is implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic sclerosis (SSc), etc. In this review, we will discuss the biological features of IL-35 and summarize recent advances in the role of IL-35 in the development and pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases; the discoveries gained from these findings might translate into future therapies for these diseases.
High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is a kind of proinflammatory mediator to stimulate the innate and adaptive immune system and participates in a number of acute and chronic inflammatory processes after sterile injury or microbial invasion. HMGB1 has been suggested to be involved in the pathogenesis of many autoimmune diseases. However, the results are contradictory or inconclusive among these findings. The aim of this study was to investigate whether serum/plasma HMGB1 levels are associated with autoimmune diseases by comparing the serum/plasma HMGB1 levels in patients with autoimmune disease and healthy controls and to further evaluate whether serum/plasma HMGB1 levels are associated with disease state.
PubMed, Medline, and Web of science databases (up to October 1, 2017) were used to obtain all relative published literature. Study quality was assessed by the Newcastle-Ottawa scale (NOS). Pooled standard mean difference (SMD) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated by fixed-effects or random-effect model analysis.
A total of 23 original articles of autoimmune diseases were finally included in the meta-analysis. Results revealed that the serum/plasma HMGB1 levels were increased in patients with autoimmune disease, compared to healthy controls. Subgroup analysis showed that serum/plasma HMGB1 levels in patients with active disease state were significantly higher than in those with inactive state. In addition, subgroup analysis based on disease type has indicated that the serum/plasma HMGB1 levels in patients with small vessel vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and sjogren syndrome were significantly higher, compared to healthy controls. Further subgroup analyses by region showed that plasma/serum HMGB1 levels were higher in Asian and European patients with autoimmune diseases.
Serum/plasma HMGB1 levels in patients with autoimmune diseases are significantly higher than in healthy controls, and may reflect the disease activity.
It is widely believed that autoimmune diseases affect predominantly in women, but the available evidence came from case control study with potential selection and recall bias. We aimed to examine the gender-specific incidence of autoimmune diseases by using national wide registers in Sweden.
Swedish Hospital Discharge Register and Outpatient Register were used to identify a set of autoimmune diseases between 1987 and 2010. Gender-specific incidence rate was standardized directly according to the Swedish age distribution in 2000.
A total of 403,757 individuals were diagnosed with autoimmune diseases between 1987 and 2010 in Sweden. The overall incidence of 32 autoimmune disease was 60% higher in women than men. Female predominance was noted in 18 specific diseases, whereas the rest of them showed no difference or male predominance. The age of onset was different between men and women in 27 autoimmune diseases.
Our study suggested that the classical view of female predominance of autoimmune diseases may be far from striking than previously believed. Further studies are needed to examine whether there is true difference between men and women.
Associations between human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and susceptibility to systemic autoimmune diseases have been reported. The predisposing alleles are variable among ethnic groups and/or diseases. On the other hand, some HLA alleles are associated with resistance to systemic autoimmune diseases, including systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. Interestingly, DRB1*13 alleles are the protective alleles shared by multiple autoimmune diseases. DRB1*13:01 allele is protective in European populations and DRB1*13:02 in Japanese. Because alleles in multiple HLA loci are in strong linkage disequilibrium, it is difficult to determine which of the protective alleles is functionally responsible for the protective effects. Thus far, association studies suggested that DRB1*13:02 represents at least one of the causally associated protective factors against multiple systemic autoimmune diseases in the Japanese population. The protective effect of DRB1*13 alleles appears to overcome the predisposing effect of the susceptible alleles in heterozygous individuals of DRB1*13 and the susceptible allele. A gene dosage effect was observed in the associations of DRB1*13:02 with the protection from systemic autoimmune diseases; thus homozygous individuals are more effectively protected from the systemic autoimmune diseases than heterozygotes. DRB1*13:02 also confers protection against organ-specific autoimmune diseases and some infectious diseases. Several hypotheses can be proposed for the molecular mechanisms of the protection conferred by DRB1*13, some of which can explain the dominant effect of DRB1*13 molecules over the susceptible alleles, but the actual protective function of DRB1*13 requires further study. Understanding of the protective mechanisms of DRB1*13 may lead to the identification of targets for the curative treatment of systemic autoimmune diseases.
To analyze the diagnosis and treatment of hydrocephalus associated with autoimmune diseases and to explore the possible mechanism of hydrocephalus in these patients.
A retrospective case series study was conducted at Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China. Files were retrieved from the hospital archives by screening records from Jan 1990 to Jan 2016. Medical records were screened for data regarding (1) the number of patients diagnosed with hydrocephalus associated with autoimmune diseases, (2) the clinical manifestation of hydrocephalus associated with autoimmune disease, and (3) the outcomes of these patients treated with medication or ventriculoperitoneal shunt (VPS).
A total of 19 of 19,643 hospitalized autoimmune diseases patients were found to have hydrocephalus. Seven of the 19 patients had systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 3 patients had Sjögren's syndrome, 2 patients had rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 1 patient had connective tissue disease, 1 patient had juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), 1 patient had Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), 1 patient had systemic sclerosis, 1 patient had Crohn's disease, 1 patient had relapsing polychondritis (RPC), and 1 patient had autoinflammatory disease (AID). Of the 19 patients, 13 received medication treatment, and the most commonly used drugs were corticosteroids and mannitol. A total of 6 patients received both medication therapy and VPS treatment with a programable valve. After average follow-up lengths of 11 months for patients who received VPS and 8.2 for patients who received medical treatment, the clinical symptoms of patients treated by VPS or medication were improved (83% (5/6) vs. 15.4% (2/13), respectively), patients were in stable condition (17% (1/6) vs. 30.8% (4/13), respectively), and mortality decreased (0% vs. 53.8% (7/13), respectively).
VPS along with corticosteroids and immunosuppressants represents an effective treatment approach for patients who suffer from hydrocephalus associated with autoimmune diseases.
Autoimmune diseases are characterized by an exaggerated immune response leading to damage and dysfunction of specific or multiple organs and tissues. Most autoimmune diseases are more prevalent in women than in men. Symptom severity, disease course, response to therapy and overall survival may also differ between males and females with autoimmune diseases. Sex hormones have a crucial role in this sex bias, with estrogens being potent stimulators of autoimmunity and androgens playing a protective role. Accumulating evidence indicates that genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors may also contribute to sex-related differences in risk and clinical course of autoimmune diseases. In this review, we discuss possible mechanisms for sex specific differences in autoimmunity with a special focus on three paradigmatic diseases: systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis. 
Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) plays an important role in the inflammatory processes. Recently it has been reported to be involved in autoimmune diseases. Many studies have investigated the serum/plasma levels of PTX3 in autoimmune diseases, but the results are contradictory or inconclusive among those findings. The purpose of this meta-analysis was to investigate whether serum/plasma levels of PTX3 were associated with autoimmune diseases by comparing the serum/plasma levels of PTX3 in the autoimmune diseases and healthy controls.
PubMed, ELSEVIER ScienceDirect and Cochrane Library databases (up to December 26, 2015) were used to obtain all relative published literatures. The study quality was assessed by the Newcastle-Ottawa scale. Pooled standard mean difference (SMD) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated by random-effect model analysis.
A total of 20 studies including seven studies of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), four studies of ankylosing spondylitis (AS), five studies of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), three studies of systemic sclerosis (SSc) and one study of multiple sclerosis (MS) were finally included in the meta-analysis. The results revealed that the serum/plasma levels of PTX3 in autoimmune diseases were significantly higher than in normal controls (SMD = 0.496 ng/mL, 95% CI = 0.107-0.886, p <0.001; I(2) = 91.9, p <0.001). The subgroup analysis showed that the serum/plasma levels of PTX3 in AS and SSc were higher than in healthy controls (pooled SMD = 0.926 ng/mL, 95% CI = 0.174-1.677, p <0.001, I(2) = 77.0, p = 0.013; pooled SMD = 0.546 ng/mL, 95% CI = 0.136-0.957, p <0.001; I(2) = 30.9, p = 0.299, respectively).
Serum/plasma levels of PTX3 in autoimmune diseases were higher than in normal controls.
The induction of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and the onset of autoimmune diseases have been reported after treatment with tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors, though controversy persists.
To determine the frequency of onset of autoimmune diseases and of the appearance of autoantibodies in psoriasis patients administered TNF inhibitors (adalimumab and etanercept) subcutaneously and to correlate this with the effectiveness of treatment, adverse effects, and the order of use of TNF inhibitors. We also tried to identify any factors that might predict the appearance of ANA and autimmune diseases.
We performed a retrospective study of a cohort of 121 patients monitored over an 11-year period. ANA were measured at baseline and at 3, 6, and 12 months; positive results were followed up by study of antibodies to double-stranded DNA. Extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) antibodies were also studied at baseline and at 3, 6, and 12 months. Patients with a baseline assay of ANA and ENA at least one more assay during the first year were included in the study, and these antibodies were measured annually thereafter. Psoriasis area severity index was calculated and adverse effects were recorded at each visit.
A significant increase in ANA positivity was observed during treatment of moderate-to-severe psoriasis with adalimumab and etanercept, but this was not associated with the onset of autoimmune diseases. No correlation was observed with treatment efficacy, the order of use of TNF inhibitors, or the appearance of adverse effects. No predictive factors for the appearance of ANA were identified, except for the body mass index.
We recommend ANA measurement and screening for autoimmune diseases prior to treatment with TNF inhibitors, but not routine serial measurements of ANA during follow-up except in patients with signs or symptoms suggestive of autoimmune disease.
Previous studies on the relationship between autoimmune diseases, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder are mainly based on hospital discharge registers with insufficient coverage of outpatient data. Furthermore, data is scant on the prevalence of autoimmune diseases in bipolar subgroups. Here we estimate the self-reported prevalences of autoimmune diseases in schizophrenia, bipolar disorder type I and II, and controls. Lifetime prevalence of autoimmune diseases was assessed through a structured interview in a sample of 9076 patients (schizophrenia N = 5278, bipolar disorder type I N = 1952, type II N = 1846) and 6485 controls. Comparative analyses were performed using logistic regressions. The prevalence of diabetes type 1 did not differ between groups. Hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism regardless of lithium effects, rheumatoid arthritis, and polymyalgia rheumatica were most common in bipolar disorder. Systemic lupus erythematosus was less common in bipolar disorder than in the other groups. The rate of autoimmune diseases did not differ significantly between bipolar subgroups. We conclude that prevalences of autoimmune diseases show clear differences between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, but not between the bipolar subgroups.
The autoantibody is an essential characteristic of inflammatory disorders, including autoimmune diseases. Although the exact pathogenic mechanisms of these diseases remain elusive, accumulated evidence has implicated that genetic factors play important roles in autoimmune inflammation. Among these factors, CD24 was first identified as a heat-stable antigen in 1978 and first successfully cloned in 1990. Thereafter, its functional roles have been intensively investigated in various human diseases, especially autoimmune diseases and cancers. It is currently known that CD24 serves as a costimulatory factor of T cells that regulate their homeostasis and proliferation, while in B cells, CD24 is functionally involved in cell activation and differentiation. CD24 can enhance autoimmune diseases in terms of its protective role in the clonal deletion of autoreactive thymocytes. Furthermore, CD24 deficiency has been linked to mouse experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Finally, CD24 genetic variants, including single-nucleotide polymorphisms and deletions, are etiologically relevant to autoimmune diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Therefore, CD24 is a promising biomarker and novel therapeutic target for autoimmune diseases. 
This study determined whether FCGR3B copy number variations (CNVs) were associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases.
A meta-analysis was conducted to determine the association between FCGR3B CNVs and susceptibility to autoimmune diseases by comparing low FCGR3B CN (<2 to ≥2) and high FCGR3B CN (>2 to ≤2).
In all, 28 comparative studies from 15 reports involving 12,160 patients and 11,103 controls were included in this meta-analysis. The meta-analysis showed a significant association between low FCGR3B CN and autoimmune diseases (OR=1.496, 95% CI=1.301-1.716, p=1.0×10(-9)). Subgroup analysis according to ethnicity indicated an association between low FCGR3B CN and autoimmune diseases in Caucasians (OR=1.482, 95% CI=1.219-1.801, p=7.7×10(-6)) and Asians (OR=1.498, 95% CI=1.306-1.717, p=1.0×10(-9)). Meta-analysis according to the type of autoimmune disease indicated a significant association of low FCGR3B CN with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; OR=1.797, 95% CI=1.562-2.068, p<1.0×10(-9)), primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS; OR=2.263, 95% CI=1.316-3.892, p=0.003), and Wegener's granulomatosis (WG; OR=1.973, 95% CI=1.178-3.302, p=0.010), but not with rheumatoid arthritis (RA; OR=1.333, 95% CI=0.947-1.877, p=0.099). However, the meta-analysis showed no association between high FCGR3B CN and SLE, RA, pSS, and WG.
Thus, the results of this meta-analysis indicated that low FCGR3B CN increased susceptibility to autoimmune diseases, especially SLE, pSS, and WG.
Autoimmune diseases occur when the immune system generates proinflammatory molecules and autoantibodies that mistakenly attack their own body. Traditional diagnosis of autoimmune disease is primarily based on physician assessment combined with core laboratory tests. However, these tests are not sensitive enough to detect early molecular events, and quite often, it is too late to control these autoimmune diseases and reverse tissue damage when conventional tests show positivity for disease. It is fortunate that during the past decade, research in nanotechnology has provided enormous opportunities for the development of ultrasensitive biosensors in detecting early biomarkers with high sensitivity. Biosensors consist of a biorecognition element and a transducer which are able to facilitate an accurate detection of proinflammatory molecules, autoantibodies and other disease-causing molecules. Apparently, novel biosensors could be superior to traditional metrics in assessing the drug efficacy in clinical trials, especially when specific biomarkers are indicative of the pathogenesis of disease. Furthermore, the portability of a biosensor enables the development of point-of-care devices. In this review, various types of biomolecule sensing systems, including electrochemical, optical and mechanical sensors, and their applications and future potentials in autoimmune disease treatment were discussed.
Autoimmune diseases often share common susceptibility genes. Most genetic variants associated with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus are also associated with other autoimmune diseases. The X-linked variant rs2294020 is positioned in exon 7 of the CCDC22 gene. The encoded protein functions in the regulation of NF-κB, a master regulator in immune response. The aim of this study is to investigate whether the rs2294020 polymorphism may be a general susceptibility factor for autoimmunity. We evaluated case-control association between the occurrence of rs2294020 and different autoimmune diseases, including new data for systemic lupus erythematosus and previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS) (though most did not analyse the X chromosome) of psoriasis, celiac disease, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, multiple sclerosis, vitiligo, type-1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis. Cases from patients affected by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and type-2 diabetes were also included in the study. We detected nominal significant associations of rs2294020 with systemic lupus erythematosus (additive model test: p=0.01), vitiligo (p=0.016), psoriasis (p=0.038), and in only one of two studies of multiple sclerosis (p=0.03). Our results suggest that rs2294020 is associated with the risk of several autoimmune diseases in European populations, specifically with diseases that present themselves, among else, in the skin.
Cancer of unknown primary (CUP) is a heterogeneous syndrome diagnosed at metastatic sites. The etiology is unknown but immune dysfunction may be a contributing factor. Patients with autoimmune diseases were identified from the Swedish Hospital Discharge Register and linked to the Swedish Cancer Registry. Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) were calculated for subsequent CUP and compared with subjects without autoimmune diseases. A total of 789,681 patients were hospitalized for any of 32 autoimmune diseases during years 1964-2012; 2,658 developed subsequent CUP, giving an overall SIR of 1.27. A total of 16 autoimmune diseases were associated with an increased risk for CUP; polymyositis/dermatomyositis showed the highest SIR of 3.51, followed by primary biliary cirrhosis (1.81) and Addison's disease (1.77). CUP risk is known to be reduced in long-time users of pain-relieving nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as aspirin. For patients with ankylosing spondylitis and with some other autoimmune diseases, with assumed chronic medication by NSAIDSs, CUP risks decreased in long-term follow-up. The overall risk of CUP was increased among patients diagnosed with autoimmune diseases, which call for clinical attention and suggest a possible role of immune dysfunction in CUP. The associations with many autoimmune diseases were weak which may imply that autoimmunity may not synergize with CUP-related immune dysfunction. However, long-term NSAID medication probably helped to curtail risks in some autoimmune diseases and CUP risks were generally higher in autoimmune diseases for which NSAIDs are not used and for these CUP appears to be a serious side effect. 
Epidemiological studies have documented higher than expected comorbidity (or, in some cases, inverse comorbidity) between schizophrenia and several autoimmune disorders. It remains unknown whether this comorbidity reflects shared genetic susceptibility loci.
The present study aimed to investigate whether verified genome wide significant variants of autoimmune disorders confer risk of schizophrenia, which could suggest a common genetic basis.
Seven hundred and fourteen genome wide significant risk variants of 25 autoimmune disorders were extracted from the NHGRI GWAS catalogue and examined for association to schizophrenia in the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium schizophrenia GWAS samples (36,989 cases and 113,075 controls).
Two independent loci at 4q24 and 6p21.32-33 originally identified from GWAS of autoimmune diseases were found genome wide associated with schizophrenia (1.7 × 10<sup>-8 </sup>≥<sup> </sup>p ≥ 4.0 × 10<sup>-21</sup>). While these observations confirm the existence of shared genetic susceptibility loci between schizophrenia and autoimmune diseases, the findings did not show a significant enrichment.
The findings do not support a genetic overlap in common SNPs between autoimmune diseases and schizophrenia that in part could explain the observed comorbidity from epidemiological studies.
The aim of this study was to explore whether the FOXP3 -3279 A/C polymorphism and (GT)n microsatellite polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases.
A meta-analysis was conducted on the associations between the FOXP3 -3279 A/C polymorphism and (GT)15 and (GT)16 polymorphisms and autoimmune diseases.
Twenty-two comparative studies with a total of 7962 patients and 7453 controls were included in the meta-analysis. Meta-analysis revealed an association between autoimmune disease and the FOXP3 -3279 AA + AC genotype (OR = 1.480, 95% CI = 1.263-1.614, p < 1.0 × 10(-9)), and stratification by ethnicity indicated a significant association between the FOXP3 -3279 AA + AC genotype and autoimmune diseases in Asians (OR = 1.416, 95% CI = 1.225-1.637, p = 2.5 × 10(-7)) and non-Caucasians (OR = 1.432, 95% CI = 1.245-1.647, p = 7.5 × 10(-8)). In addition, corrected p values for multiple testing remained significant. Meta-analysis revealed no association between autoimmune disease and the FOXP3 (GT)15 allele (OR = 1.051, 95% CI = 0.933-1.183, p = 0.413). Similarly, the FOXP3 (GT)16 allele showed no associations with autoimmune disease.
This meta-analysis indicates that the FOXP3 -3279 A/C polymorphism is associated with susceptibility to autoimmune disease in Asians and non-Caucasians.
Proper functioning within the gastrointestinal (GI) system is essential to immune integrity. Autoimmune diseases (ADs) can disrupt GI integrity and cause serious derangements of organ function. ADs exist on a continuum of mild to severe. Life-threatening presentations of ADs can lead to rapid clinical demise. Additionally, the medications used to control ADs can precipitate gastric bleeding and predispose patients to sepsis in critical care. AD treatment focuses on diminishing symptoms through reducing autoantibody production that leads to cytokine release. This article details common and rare presentations of acute ADs associated with GI manifestations in critically ill patients.
Viruses, bacteria and other infectious pathogens are the major postulated environmental triggers of autoimmunity. In the present nation-wide study we describe the association between infections and 29 autoimmune diseases. We used the Danish Civil Registration System to identify 4.5 million persons born between 1945 and 2000. Information on infections and autoimmune diseases was obtained from the Danish Hospital Register. The cohort was followed from 1977 to 2012. Incidence rate ratios for developing an autoimmune disease were estimated using poisson regression. We found an association between hospital admission for an infection and 29 autoimmune diseases. This study shows that infections are risk factors for a broad spectrum of autoimmune diseases in a dose-response and temporal manner, in agreement with the hypothesis that infections are an environmental risk factor contributing to the etiology of autoimmune diseases together with genetic factors.
Autoimmune diseases (AIDs) are incurable but suppressible diseases whose molecular mechanisms are yet to be elucidated. In this work, we selected five systemic autoimmune diseases such as Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), Type 1 Diabetes (T1D), Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), Autoimmune Thyroid Disease (ATD) and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE). Heterogeneous data such as miRNA, transcription factor (TF), target genes and protein-protein interactions involved in these AIDs were integrated to understand their roles at different functional levels of miRNA such as transcription initiation, gene regulatory network formation and post transcriptional regulation. To understand the functional characteristics of these complex biological networks, they can be simplified as network motifs (sub networks) and motif-motif interacting pairs (MMIs). The network motif patterns and motif-motif interacting pairs that occur for the selected five diseases were identified. To further understand the functional association between AIDs, functions and pathways were determined using gene set enrichment analysis and five selected immune signaling pathways (ISPs). The crosstalk within AIDs and between the immune signaling pathways (ISPs) could provide novel insights in deciphering disease mechanisms. This study represents the first investigation of miRNA-TF regulatory network for AIDs and its association with ISPs using sub-network motifs.
Although the female predominance of autoimmune diseases is not completely understood, sex hormones are thought to play a role. Attention to lifelong reproductive health is especially important for women with autoimmune disorders. Many of these women require long-term immunosuppressive therapy that may affect their ability to clear infections, including viruses, and may alter natural tumor surveillance mechanisms. As a result, women with autoimmune diseases may have different risks for common reproductive-related malignancies that may in turn affect screening guidelines and other preventive measures, including vaccination. Women with autoimmune diseases need to adhere diligently to screening recommendations.
Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is a member of the common γ-chain cytokines with broad pleiotropic actions that affects different immune and nonimmune cells. IL-21 can affect differentiation, proliferation and function of T and B cells; it can also induce the maturation and enhance the cytotoxicity of CD8+ T cells and Natural killer (NK) cells. IL-21 exerts major effects on B-cell activation and differentiation or apoptosis during humoral immune responses and induces differentiation of naïve B cells and memory B cells into plasma cells. IL-21 also affects different subtypes of T cells including T helper-17 (TH17), T follicular helper (TFH) and regulatory T (Treg) cells and thereby promotes the development of autoimmune disorders and inflammatory diseases. Observations have shown that the blockade of IL-21 has therapeutic effects on various autoimmune diseases in animal models. A better understanding of the regulation of cell differentiation and stabilization by IL-21 in the context of each specific autoimmune disease or tissue-specific pathological microenvironments will be helpful in developing novel treatments to control autoimmune diseases. Herein, we review the biological effects of IL-21 on different immune cells and uncover the emerging role of this interesting cytokine in autoimmune diseases. 
Autoimmune diseases are pathological conditions characterized by abnormal responses, accompanied by autoantibodies to self-molecules. The role of vitamin D in autoimmune diseases has increased significantly in the recent past from its functions in calcium and phosphate homoeostasis, and it is now involved in the regulations and proliferations of Th1 and Th17 lymphocyte. 1α,25(OH)2D3 is very important in ameliorations of inflammatory disorders arising from autoimmune diseases, but the mechanism by which this is performed is still a bone of contentions. This review aimed to highlight the existing facts about the roles of Vitamin D in the treatment and management of autoimmune diseases. An extensive online literature search was conducted using PubMed, MEDLINE and Scopus. Accumulated bodies of research evidence are available which demonstrates that Vitamin D has a very important part to play in the regulation of immune responses in autoimmune diseases. Some of the authors suggested that Vitamin D3 carry-out its immunosuppressive and immune modulatory action, through its actions on antigen-presenting cells and activated T and B cells with the help of Vitamin D receptors present on the each of these cells. Vitamin D supplementation assists in autoimmune disorders by making qualitative and quantitative changes in the immune system (downregulation of Th1 and upregulations of Th2 cells). This resulted in the body to be more tolerant of self and less likely to mount autoimmune responses.
There is generally no cure for autoimmune disorders, but the symptoms can be managed. Currently available drugs/treatments are more potent than those in the past decades. However, finding the right drug and right patients has remained a serious problem. We should revise our diagnosis criteria to more accurate ones. During the recent years, personalized medicine has attracted much attention. However, it needs to be well-explained for autoimmune diseases. Personalized medicine aims to find the most optimum drugs for a patient. Hence, recognizing the drugs based on genetics and molecular profile of patients, needs a comprehensive protocol. This study attempted to discuss the most practical and effective ways for identifying right patient and right drug. Patients should be divided into subpopulations. According to the last diagnosis criteria and therapeutic options, it was attempted to highlight the gaps or contradictions in current understanding and suggest what the future of research in this area may hold. Various factors could be considered, including genes variants, genes expression, epigenetic alterations, immune responses, and also basic and obvious characteristics (sex, age, ethnic, etc.). Moreover, advantages, disadvantages, obstacles, and opportunities during the personalized medicine for autoimmune diseases have been discussed in great detail. Finally, creation of a global library that covers all the aspects of personalized medicines for different types of autoimmune disease was suggested. In conclusion, revising diagnosis and treatments of autoimmune diseases toward personalized medicine could be the revolutionary step for having more effective and safer therapeutic options.
Within the last 30 years, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection has changed its status from inevitably fatal to chronic disorder with limited impact on life span. However, this breakthrough was mainly the effect of introduction of the aggressive antiviral treatment, which has led to the clinically significant increase in CD4+ cell count, resulting in fewer cases of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and improved management of opportunistic infections occurring in the course of the disease. The occurrence of a particular autoimmune disease depends on degree of immunosuppression of the HIV-positive patient. In 2002, four stages of autoimmunity were proposed in patients infected by HIV, based on the absolute CD4+ cell count, feature of AIDS as well as on the presence of autoimmune diseases. Spectrum of autoimmune diseases associated with HIV infection seems to be unexpectedly wide, involving several organs, such as lungs (sarcoidosis), thyroid gland (Graves' disease), liver (autoimmune hepatitis), connective tissue (systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, polyarteritis nodosa and other types of vasculitis, antiphospholipid syndrome) or hematopoietic system (autoimmune cytopenias). This paper contains the state of art on possible coincidences between HIV infection and a differential types of autoimmune diseases, including the potential mechanisms of this phenomenon. As the clinical manifestations of autoimmunization often mimic those inscribed in the course of HIV infection, health care providers should be aware of this rare but potentially deadly association and actively seek for its symptoms in their patients.
The global prevalence of "diabesity"-diabetes related to obesity-is increasing steadily over the past few decades because of the obesity epidemic. Although bariatric surgery is an effective treatment option for patients with diabesity, its limited availability, invasiveness, relatively high costs and the potential for surgical and postsurgical complications restrict its widespread use. Therefore, medical management is the only option for a majority of patients with diabesity. Diabetes control with several anti-diabetic agents, including insulin, causes weight gain with probability of worsening diabesity. Rational use of anti-diabetic medications with weight loss potential in varying combinations may help to address this key issue for long-term management of diabesity. There is no consensus on such an approach from different professional bodies like American Diabetes Association, European Association for Study of Diabetes, or International Diabetes Federation. We attempt to discuss the key issues and realistic targets for diabesity management in this paper.
Rational use of anti-diabetic combinations can mitigate worsening of diabesity to some extent while managing patients. Retrospective studies showed that combination therapy with glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists and sodium glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors, when administered along with other anti-diabetic medications, offer the best therapeutic benefit in the medical management of diabesity. Different combinations of other anti-diabetic drugs with minimum weight gain potential were also found useful. Because of insufficient evidence based on prospective randomised controlled trials (RCTs), future research should focus on evolving the appropriate rational drug combinations for the medical management of diabesity.
Caring for older adults with diabesity can be challenging for primary care nurse practitioners. The purpose of this study was to examine whether there would be an additive effect of diabesity on depressive symptoms and physical functioning of older adults. We hypothesized that there is an additive effect of diabesity on depressive symptoms and physical functioning among older adults with one or neither condition.
We performed a cross-sectional analysis of data from National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys collected from African-American and Caucasian adults aged 65 and over between 2009 and 2010. Multivariate linear regression models were utilized. The sample consisted of 918 participants. In covariate-adjusted models, participants with diabesity reported more depressive symptoms than people with neither condition. Individuals with diabesity and those with obesity alone reported significantly more difficulty with physical function when compared to participants with neither condition.
Findings suggest that diabesity was more burdensome to older adults than either condition alone. More research is needed to understand the interplay between depression, physical function, and diabesity.
To disrupt the adverse effects of diabesity burden, increased nurse practitioner awareness of this phenomenon may be beneficial in improving and maintaining physical and mental health among older adults.
Diabesity (obesity and diabetes mellitus) has been identified as a potential contributor to early-onset frailty. Impairments contributing to early onset of physical frailty in this population are not well understood, and there is little evidence of the impact of peripheral neuropathy on frailty. The purpose of this study was to determine impairments that contribute to early-onset physical frailty in individuals with diabesity and peripheral neuropathy.
We studied 105 participants, 82 with diabesity and peripheral neuropathy (57 years of age, body mass index [BMI] 31 kg/m<sup>2</sup>); 13 with diabesity only (53 years of age, BMI 34 kg/m<sup>2</sup>) and 10 obese controls (67 years of age, BMI 32 kg/m<sup>2</sup>). Peripheral neuropathy was determined using Semmes Weinstein monofilaments; physical frailty was classified using the 9-item, modified Physical Performance Test; and knee extension and ankle plantarflexion peak torques were measured using isokinetic dynamometry.
Participants with diabesity and peripheral neuropathy were 7.4 times more likely to be classified as physically frail. Impairments in lower-extremity function were associated with classification of frailty.
Individuals with diabesity and peripheral neuropathy are particularly likely to be classified as frail. Earlier identification and interventions aimed at improving lower-extremity function may be important to mitigate the early-onset functional decline.
The association of obesity and diabetes, termed "diabesity", defines a combination of primarily metabolic disorders with insulin resistance as the underlying common pathophysiology. Cardiovascular disorders associated with diabesity represent the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the Western world. This makes diabesity, with its rising impacts on both health and economics, one of the most challenging biomedical and social threats of present century. The emerging comprehension of the genes whose alteration confers inter-individual differences on risk factors for diabetes or obesity, together with the potential role of genetically determined variants on mechanisms controlling responsiveness, effectiveness and safety of anti-diabetic therapy underlines the need of additional knowledge on molecular mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of diabesity. Endothelial cell dysfunction, resulting from the unbalanced production of endothelial-derived vascular mediators, is known to be present at the earliest stages of insulin resistance and obesity, and may precede the clinical diagnosis of diabetes by several years. Once considered as a mere consequence of metabolic abnormalities, it is now clear that endothelial dysfunctional activity may play a pivotal role in the progression of diabesity. In the vicious circle where vascular defects and metabolic disturbances worsen and reinforce each other, a low-grade, chronic, and 'cold' inflammation (metaflammation) has been suggested to serve as the pathophysiological link that binds endothelial and metabolic dysfunctions. In this paradigm, it is important to consider how traditional antidiabetic treatments (specifically addressing metabolic dysregulation) may directly impact on inflammatory processes or cardiovascular function. Indeed, not all drugs currently available to treat diabetes possess the same anti-inflammatory potential, or target endothelial cell function equally. Perspective strategies pointing at reducing metaflammation or directly addressing endothelial dysfunction may disclose beneficial consequences on metabolic regulation. This review focuses on existing and potential new approaches ameliorating endothelial dysfunction and vascular inflammation in the context of diabesity.
Diabesity-obesity resulting in diabetes-is a major health problem globally because of the obesity epidemic. Several anti-diabetic medications cause weight gain and may worsen obesity, and possibly diabeisty. Two recent small retrospective cohort studies showed weight loss and diabetes improvement with combination of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonists and sodium-glucose co-transporter type-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors in obese subjects. We assessed the effect of combination therapy with GLP-1 agonists and SGLT-2 inhibitors in the management of diabesity in a retrospective study at the Wolverhampton Diabetes Centre. Out of 79 patients on this combination regimen with other anti-diabetic medications, 37 cases who had follow up at 3-6 months were studied. Mean age and duration of follow up were 57.4 (+/-7.8) and 139 (+/-32.6) days, respectively. Twenty-two patients (59.5 %) were Asians. Statistically significant improvements in clinical parameters such as body weight reduction (3.07 kg), glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) reduction (1.05 %), lower BMI (-1.13 kg/M<sup>2</sup>) and insulin dose reduction (6.8 units) were observed (p < 0.05 for all) in patients on combination regimen. Linear regression analysis showed that baseline HbA1c and baseline insulin dose were independent predictors of HbA1c reduction and insulin dose reduction, respectively. Our results suggest that combination therapy with GLP-1 agonists and SGLT-2 inhibitors is a promising option for patients with diabesity.
Diabesity, a combination of diabetes mellitus type 2 and obesity, is one of the biggest global health problems. Individual nutrition therapy and physical activity are effective measures in prevention and treatment.
Requirements for an integrated diabesity service were specified and evaluated in two stages. The aim of the first stage was to perform a feasibility trial in patients with diabesity, using separate diaries. DiabMemory for diabetes and Nutrinaut for nutrition. Based on the results of the first stage, a prototype of an integrated diabesity solution (KIT-Nutriton, AIT) was developed and evaluated.
First stage trial was performed with 10 diabesity patients (2f, med:53 y. (IQR:7), T2DM, BMI &gt; 28 kg/m<sup>2</sup>) with 3 months follow-up and a significant reduction of BMI. Participants noticed concerns about using two separate diary solutions. Results of the field trial with KIT-Nutrition with 14 healthy subjects (3f, med:26 y (IQR: 20,25)) showed that overall, 77.6% of the intended tasks had been achieved.
Results show that the integrated KIT-Nutrition app, providing access to a nutrition database, is feasible and accepted by the users. Before further trials can be made, an extension for regional food terms is recommended.
GPR40 (Free fatty acid receptor 1) has emerged as an important therapeutic target for diabetes. Several studies have demonstrated the association of comorbid psychiatric conditions with decreased n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, which may act as an agonist for GPR40. In this study, we for the first time provide evidence of reduced GPR40 signaling in the hippocampus and cortex which may be a critical underlying mechanism mediating cognitive deficits in diabesity (diabetes and obesity together). Specifically, we showed decreased GPR40 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression in the brain regions of high-fat-diet-induced obese and db/db mice. Next, we demonstrated that chronic treatment with docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) or the synthetic GPR40 agonist, GW9508, significantly alleviates cognitive functions in mice, which correlates with increased BDNF expression in the hippocampus. This supports the hypothesis that DHA improves cognitive function in diabesity via GPR40 agonism. We also showed that DHA specifically activates GPR40 and modulates BDNF expression in primary cortical neurons mediated by the extracellular receptor kinase (ERK) and P38-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways. Finally, the central nervous system (CNS)-specific blockade of GPR40 signaling abrogated the memory potentiating effects of DHA, and induction of BDNF expression in the hippocampus. Thus, we provided evidence that DHA stimulation of GPR40 mediate some of DHA's beneficial effects in metabolic syndrome and identify GPR40 as a viable therapeutic target for the treatment of CNS-related comorbidities associated with diabesity.
To assess the effect of the combination of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and pre-gravid obesity ('diabesity') in singleton gestations.
We compared perinatal outcomes of singleton gestations in mothers with GDM and pre-gravid obesity, with GDM but with normal pre-gravid BMI, and obese mothers without GDM.
We compared diabesity mothers (n = 1525, 24.4% of mothers with GDM, 9.9% of all obese women) to mothers with GDM but with normal BMI (n = 4704, 75.6% of mothers with GDM) and to obese mothers without GDM (n = 13,937, 90.1% of all obese mothers). Obesity, with and without GDM, increased the odds of having chronic hypertension whereas preeclampsia appears to be influenced by obesity only, as were the risk of births at <33 weeks' gestation, of birth weight >4000 g, low 5-min Apgar scores and NICU admissions.
Obesity (without diabetes) is more frequently associated with adverse perinatal outcomes than diabesity or GDM in non-obese mothers. A campaign to decrease pre-gravid obesity should have at least the same priority as any campaign to control GDM.
Excess lower extremity intermuscular adipose tissue (IMAT), reduced strength, and functional limitations are common in obese individuals with and without diabetes (the former termed diabesity). Individuals with diabesity are particularly susceptible to accelerated sarcopenia, which may be underdiagnosed. The purpose of this study was to determine critical values for leg IMAT volume, plantar flexor (PF) muscle strength, and physical performance that help identify individuals with diabesity who have sarcopenia.
Forty-three age- and sex-matched obese adults were studied: 12 with type 2 diabetes, 21 with diabetes and peripheral neuropathy, and 10 nondiabetic controls. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry-derived skeletal muscle index determined classification of sarcopenia. Leg fat (% IMAT), ankle (PF) peak torque, and power while ascending 10 steps, were used as explanators of sarcopenia. Receiver operating curves identified critical values for each explanator individually. Logistic regression models using all 3 explanators, and only PF torque and stair power, were also created. Receiver operating curve analyses identified the predicted probability that maximized each model's sensitivity and specificity. A leave-one-out cross validation was used to simulate the models' performance in an independent sample.
Thirty-two participants were sarcopenic, and 11 were not. Critical values for individual explanators were 21% IMAT, 68 Nm PF torque, and 441 watts of stair power. Predicted probabilities of .76 and .67 were chosen as the optimal cutoff probabilities for the model combining all 3 explanators, and the model combining PF torque and stair power, respectively. The cross-validation analysis produced an accuracy of 82.4%, using the cutoff probability of .5, and an accuracy of 76.5% using the cutoff of 0.76. The area under the curve for the cross validation receiver operating curve analysis was 0.82. Critical values of leg % IMAT, PF torque, and stair power can classify individuals with diabesity as sarcopenic. The results of the cross validation give us confidence that the sample used in this study was representative of the target population, and suggests models created from this sample may perform well in externally derived data sets.
Clinicians may be able to use these critical values to select interventions that specifically target sarcopenia. Measures of % IMAT, PF torque, and stair power may offer a customized alternative to traditional sarcopenic classification systems, which may not be optimally suited to the common impairments among individuals with diabesity.
One-third of men with obesity or type 2 diabetes have subnormal free testosterone concentrations. The lower free testosterone concentrations are observed in obese men at all ages, including adolescents at completion of puberty. The gonadotropin concentrations in these males are inappropriately normal; thus, these patients have hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH). The causative mechanism of diabesity-induced HH is yet to be defined but is likely multifactorial. Decreased insulin and leptin signaling in the central nervous system are probably significant contributors. Contrary to popular belief, estrogen concentrations are lower in men with HH. Men with diabesity and HH have more fat mass and are more insulin resistant than eugonadal men. In addition, they have a high prevalence of anemia and higher mortality rates than eugonadal men. Testosterone replacement therapy results in a loss of fat mass, gain in lean mass, and increase in insulin sensitivity in men with diabesity and HH. This is accompanied by an increase in insulin-signaling genes in adipose tissue and a reduction in inflammatory mediators that interfere with insulin signaling. There is also an improvement in sexual symptoms, anemia, LDL cholesterol, and lipoprotein (a). However, testosterone therapy does not consistently affect HbA<sub>1c</sub> in men with diabetes. The effect of testosterone replacement on cardiovascular events or mortality in men with diabesity is not known and remains to be studied in prospective trials.
It is widely accepted that high calorie diets and a sedentary lifestyle sturdily influence the incidence and outcome of type 2 diabetes and obesity, which can occur simultaneously, a situation called diabesity. Tightly linked with metabolic and energy regulation, a close association between diabetes and Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been proposed. Among the common pathogenic mechanisms that underpin both conditions, insulin resistance, brain glucose hypometabolism, and metabolic dyshomeostasis appear to have a pivotal role. This century is an unprecedented diabetogenic period in human history, so therapeutic strategies and/or approaches to control and/or revert this evolving epidemic is of utmost importance. This chapter will make a brief contextualization about the impact that diabetes and obesity can exert in brain structure and function alongside with a brief survey about the role of insulin in normal brain function, exploring its roles in cognition and brain glucose metabolism. Later, attention will be given to the intricate relation of diabesity, insulin resistance, and AD. Finally, both pharmacological and lifestyle interventions will also be reviewed as strategies aimed at fighting diabesity and/or AD-related metabolic effects.
Diabesity is a new term for obesity-dependent diabetes, which is also associated with cardiovascular and other comorbidities with rising epidemic. Traditional treatments (sulfonylureas and thiazolidinediones) of diabetes are associated with weight gain, except metformin. Newer agents such as glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) and Sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) are causing a modest weight reduction, whereas dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4i) are weight neutral. Oxyntomodulin, a native GLP-1/glucagon receptor agonist produced a superior weight loss and antihyperglycemic effects in obese mice and humans. Recent findings with synthetic dual GLP-1/glucagon receptor agonists have shown a good weight loss and antihyperglycemic profile in diet-induced obese (DIO) mice. Targeting combinations of GLP-1 receptor and glucagon receptor simultaneously with a single peptide may be the better strategy to achieve marked weight loss and considerable glycemic control in diabesity. Cardiovascular safety is very important with new antidiabetic agents due to rosiglitazone controversy. Current on-going clinical trials will clarify the cardiovascular effects of incretin-based therapies in near future. Based on current knowledge and rapid progress in the field, there is a strong possibility that the GLP-1/glucagon receptor co-agonists will likely be the new therapeutic treatment for diabesity for decades to come.
To assess the effect of the concurrence of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and pre-gravid obesity in twin gestations ("diabesity").
We compared perinatal outcomes of twin gestation in mothers with GDM and pre-gravid obesity (1.7%), mothers with GDM but with normal BMI (6.2%), and obese mothers without GDM (7.0%).
Twin pregnancies with "diabesity" were associated with significantly higher incidence of stillbirth (OR = 6.4; 95%CI = 1.4, 33.4) and existing chronic hypertension (OR = 4.2; 95%CI = 1.2, 14.8) than in GDM pregnancies without obesity, and with births at 33-36 weeks as compared with the other groups. Otherwise, the comparisons showed remarkable similar results in terms of gestational age, birth weight, preeclampsia, cesarean section rate, and fetal-neonatal outcomes.
It appears that diabesity has a relatively minor effect in twins. If this will be confirmed by other studies, it would be important to elucidate how twins ameliorate the adverse outcomes of diabesity.
Adipocyte fate commitment is characterized by morphological changes of fibroblastic pre-adipocyte cells, and specifically by accumulation of lipid droplets (LDs) as part of the adipogenesis metabolism. Formation of LDs indicates the production of triglycerides from glucose through an insulin-regulated glucose internalization process. In obesity, adipocytes typically become insulin resistant, and glucose transport into the cells is impaired, resulting in type 2 diabetes. In the present study, we monitored the adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cultured cells exposed to high (450 mg/dL hyperglycemia) and low (100 mg/dL physiological) glucose concentrations, in a novel cell culture model system of diabesity. In addition to glucose conditions, cells were concurrently exposed to different substrate tensile strains (12% and control) based on our prior work which revealed that adipogenesis is accelerated in cultures subjected to static, chronic substrate tensile deformations. Phase-contrast images were taken throughout the adipogenesis process (3 weeks) and were analyzed by an image processing algorithm which quantitatively monitors cell differentiation and lipid accumulation (number of LDs per cell and their radius as well as cell size and shape). The results indicated that high glucose concentrations and substrate tensile strains delivered to adipocytes accelerated lipid production by 1.7- and 1.4-fold, respectively. In addition, significant changes in average cell projected area and in other morphological attributes were observed during the differentiation process. The importance of this study is in characterizing the adipogenesis parameters as potential read-outs that can predict the occurrence of insulin resistance in the development of diabesity.
Strong evidence has shown that metabolic surgery is more effective than medical treatment in the treatment of type 2 diabetic patients. However, no study demonstrated a survival benefit and reduction of diabetes-related end-organ damage. Here, we describe the study design of a large prospective cohort study, the Taiwan Diabesity Study (TDS) which would compare the long-term survival rate and end-organ damage between overweight/obese type 2 diabetic patients receiving metabolic surgery and medical treatment.
Eligibility criteria include type 2 diabetic patients with duration > 6 months, body mass index (BMI) over 25 kg/m<sup>2</sup> and age between 20 and 67 years. Exclusion criteria are serum creatinine over 2.0 mg/dL, C-peptide below 1.0 ng/ml, recent history of cancer, and major diabetic complications. Eligible participants were recruited from six medical centers in Taiwan. The survival rate and diabetes-related end organ damage will be compared between the metabolic surgery group and medical group after follow-up for 10 years.
In 3 years, 1016 participants were identified from 38,751 patients. The average BMI of patients was 30.6 (±2.6) kg/m<sup>2</sup> and the average hemoglobin A1c was 8.2% (±1.5%) with 18% of them receiving insulin treatment. Among them, 126 patients received metabolic surgery and 890 patients received conventional medical treatment. The metabolic surgery group are younger, have a higher proportion of females, higher BMI and blood lipids as compared to the medical group.
The TDS recruited 1016 overweight/obese type 2 diabetic patients including 126 patients receiving metabolic surgery and 890 patients receiving medical treatment.
Several studies associate foetal human exposure to bisphenol A (BPA) to metabolic/endocrine diseases, mainly diabesity. They describe the role of BPA in the disruption of pancreatic beta cell, adipocyte and hepatocyte functions. Indeed, the complexity of the diabesity phenotype is due to the involvement of different endoderm-derived organs, all targets of BPA. Here, we analyse this point delineating a picture of different mechanisms of BPA toxicity in endoderm-derived organs leading to diabesity. Moving from epidemiological data, we summarize the in vivo experimental data of the BPA effects on endoderm-derived organs (thyroid, pancreas, liver, gut, prostate and lung) after prenatal exposure. Mainly, we gather molecular data evidencing harmful effects at low-dose exposure, pointing to the risk to human health. Although the fragmentation of molecular data does not allow a clear conclusion to be drawn, the present work indicates that the developmental exposure to BPA represents a risk for endoderm-derived organs development as it deregulates the gene expression from the earliest developmental stages. A more systematic analysis of BPA impact on the transcriptomes of endoderm-derived organs is still missing. Here, we suggest in vitro toxicogenomics approaches as a tool for the identification of common mechanisms of BPA toxicity leading to the diabesity in organs having the same developmental origin.
Patients with diabesity have a significantly increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Therefore, therapy addressing the multiple metabolic abnormalities linked with diabesity and leading to further reduction of cardiovascular risk is highly desirable. Activation of the TGR5 receptor holds therapeutic potential for diabesity. In the present study, we evaluated the efficacy of TRC210258, a novel TGR5 agonist, in clinically relevant animal models of diabesity.
A novel small molecule, TRC210258 (N-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-(4-fluorophenoxy)-N-methylimidazo (1, 2-a) pyrimidine-3-carboxamide), was synthesized. The in vitro TGR5 receptor activation potential of TRC210258 was assessed by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) assay and cAMP-responsive element reporter assay using cells overexpressing the human TGR5 receptor. The effect of TRC210258 on glucagon-like peptide-1 release was evaluated in vitro using a human enteroendocrine cell line. The effect of TRC210258 on energy expenditure and glycemic control was evaluated in high-fat diet-induced obese mice. Additionally, the effect of TRC210258 on dyslipidemic parameters was determined in high fat-fed hamsters.
TRC210258 demonstrated potent TGR5 agonist activity, with enhanced glucagon-like peptide-1 release and energy expenditure. Treatment with TRC210258 resulted in better glycemic control and improved parameters of dyslipidemia such as plasma triglyceride, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. Treatment with TRC210258 also improved emerging dyslipidemic cardiovascular risk parameters, including remnant cholesterol and triglyceride clearance.
This study highlights the potential of TRC210258, a novel TGR5 agonist, to improve dyslipidemic cardiovascular risk beyond glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabesity is the leading cause of modern, chronic disease. In 2012, diabetes killed 1.2 million people worldwide and its global prevalence exceeded 347 million people, and it is expected that it will increase to 540 million by 2030. Because of this health imperative, it is also linked to increasing obesity. The role of the inflammatory process and oxidative stress in the pathophysiology of these diseases is widely documented. This paper review, using data from major databases, the role of biopeptides with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity as a potential aid for the prevention and treatment of diabesity, since the mechanisms of action mentioned directly affect oxidative stress and the characteristic imbalance of the inflammatory process of this disease. Some of these studies have demonstrated beneficial results in relation to oxidative stress and proinflammatory markers. However, the role of biopeptides, in relation to oxidative stress and inflammatory biomarkers, remains unclear and represents a potentially fruitful area for further research in the health area.
'Diabesity' is the term for diabetes occurring in the context of obesity. In this review, we will overview the latest epidemiological data available describing the rising prevalence, health impact and economic impact of diabesity. We will also outline the measures required to slowdown this newly evolving epidemic. The global prevalence of diabetes in 2010 was 284 million people worldwide constituting around 6.4% of the world population, which is higher than was projected in earlier studies. Furthermore, the projections for 2030 show the prevalence to reach 439 million individuals comprising ~7.7% of the world population. The burden of diabetes on the world economy has been rising steadily in the last decade to reach $376 billion in 2010 and is expected to reach $490 billion in 2030. Diabesity represents a substantial economic burden as reflected by diabetes and obesity consuming 14 and 5.7% of the USA's total health expenditure, respectively, representing the highest known expenditure on diabesity worldwide. When costs associated with being overweight were also included, the upper limit of obesity expenditure rises to 9.1% of the USA's total healthcare expenditure. The highest recorded expenditure on diabetes alone was in Saudi Arabia consuming 21% of the country's total health expenditure, with no data available about the health expenditure on obesity. The health impact of diabesity is substantial to include long-term diabetic complications, reduction in health-related functioning, reduction of quality of life and reduced overall life expectancy. Long-term complications include myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular stroke and end-stage renal disease. Also recent advances have found that there is an association between chronic stress, depression and sleeping troubles to both diabetes and obesity. This century is the unprecedented diabetogenic era in human history. It is thus urgent to take steps including screening, prevention and early management in an attempt to control this evolving epidemic of diabesity.
Visfatin is one of the prominent adipokines secreted by adipose tissue. The level of visfatin increases significantly in persons with obesity owing to increased body mass index (BMI). During obesity, the adipocytes which populate adipose tissue, undergo hypertrophy and hyperplasia and secrete a number of adipocytokines including visfatin. Visfatin, which also act as an enzyme nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase, is one of the prominent adipokines that influence metabolic homeostasis in the body. Visfatin exists in two forms, extracellular and intracellular, and enacts a multitude of actions. The direct and indirect evidence gathered from in-vitro, in-vivo and clinical studies indicate that visfatin modulates obesity and metabolic syndrome-related pathophysiological activities including enhanced inflammation, angiogenesis, synthesis of NAD mononucleotide, and upregulation of antiapoptotic proteins in a number of cell types. It has been implicated in a number of obesity-related alterations and metabolic derangement such as diabetes, cardiovascular complications and some forms of cancers. In this review, the novel hypothesis about the role of visfatin in diabesity has been proposed which implies recent advances in studies about the pathophysiological roles of visfatin during obesity and chronic high glucose in the circulation. Visfatin at high concentration attracts immune cells and produces chronic inflammation in adipocytes. Additionally, it induces insulin resistance in many tissues and causes pancreatic beta cells dysfunction at later stages. Further, its potential as an important target to develop molecular medicine in diabesity and related metabolic syndrome has been highlighted.
Diabesity and fatty liver have been associated with low levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and thus could impair macrophage-specific reverse cholesterol transport (m-RCT). Liver X receptor (LXR) plays a critical role in m-RCT. Abcg5/g8 sterol transporters, which are involved in cholesterol trafficking into bile, as well as other LXR targets, could be compromised in the livers of obese individuals. We aimed to determine m-RCT dynamics in a mouse model of diabesity, the db/db mice. These obese mice displayed a significant retention of macrophage-derived cholesterol in the liver and reduced fecal cholesterol elimination compared with nonobese mice. This was associated with a significant downregulation of the hepatic LXR targets, including Abcg5/g8. Pharmacologic induction of LXR promoted the delivery of total tracer output into feces in db/db mice, partly due to increased liver and small intestine Abcg5/Abcg8 gene expression. Notably, a favorable upregulation of the hepatic levels of ABCG5/G8 and NR1H3 was also observed postoperatively in morbidly obese patients, suggesting a similar LXR impairment in these patients. In conclusion, our data show that downregulation of the LXR axis impairs cholesterol transfer from macrophages to feces in db/db mice, whereas the induction of the LXR axis partly restores impaired m-RCT by elevating the liver and small intestine expressions of Abcg5/g8.
Bariatric surgery is used to induce weight loss (baros = weight). Evidence has shown that bariatric surgery improves the comorbid conditions associated with obesity such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and type 2 diabetes mellitus T2DM. Hence, shifting towards using metabolic surgery instead of bariatric surgery is currently more appropriate in certain subset of patients. Endocrine changes resulting from operative manipulation of the gastrointestinal tract after metabolic surgery translate into metabolic benefits with respect to the comorbid conditions. Other changes include bacterial flora rearrangement, bile acids secretion, and adipose tissue effect. The aim of this systematic review is to examine clinical trials regarding long-term effects of bariatric and metabolic surgery on patients with T2DM and to evaluate the potential mechanisms leading to the improvement in the glycaemic control.
<b>Francesca Lake, Managing Editor, speaks to Chinnadorai Rajeswaran.</b> Dr Rajeswaran is a consultant physician (Diabetes & Endocrinology) at Mid Yorkshire NHS Trust. He gained specialist training in Leeds, in diabetes and endocrinology. He has a special interest in obesity and is involved in research in obesity and diabetes. He also has a number of publications, book chapters and presentations to his credit. He along with other co-authors has published a book on weight loss surgery, titled: "The Ultimate Guide to Weight Loss Surgery." He leads the specialist obesity service at the Mid Yorkshire Trust and Kirklees weight management service. With the help of colleagues in diabetes and obesity he set up the National Diabesity Forum. Dr Rajeswaran is also the medical advisor for Simplyweight, a global specialist weight management organization. He is also involved in both local and international charity work.
Over the last decades, an escalating rate of type 2 diabetes has paralleled an epidemic rise in the prevalence of obesity. Both diabetes and obesity confer an increased risk of cardiovascular comorbidities, including hypertension, coronary artery disease and stroke. Vascular dysfunction, represented by impaired endothelial release of vasodilator substances or defective smooth muscle vasodilator reactivity, is the early stage of the process leading to atherosclerosis and a common finding in patients with diabesity. It is understandable, therefore, that effective treatments for diabesity should restore vascular function to prevent the development of cardiovascular disease. Recent evidence from clinical studies supports the efficacy of incretin-based antidiabetic therapies for vascular protection. Thus, glucose control with either DDP-4 inhibitor or GLP-1 receptor therapies seems associated with favorable effects on vascular function in diabetes and the metabolic syndrome. Another mechanism to counter excess plasma glucose and reduce body weight in these patients may rely on drug therapies targeting gut hormones, as suggested by the efficacy of bariatric surgery to produce both sustained weight loss and high diabetes remission rates. Also, as knowledge of the multifaceted vascular actions of adipokines and their dysregulation in patients with diabesity increases, these substances become attractive targets for treatments aimed at cardiovascular prevention. The increasing coexistence of diabetes and obesity presents complex treatment challenges owing to the elevated risk of developing cardiovascular complications. Hence, therapeutic strategies integrating glycemic control, weight loss and vascular protection are of the greatest importance to successfully counteract the health and economic burden posed by diabesity.
Postnatal intestinal ontogenesis in an animal model of diabesity may recapitulate morphological and transduction features of diabesity-induced intestinal dysplasia and its amelioration by endogenous (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). Proliferation, differentiation, and transduction aspects of intestinal ontogenesis have been studied here in obese, insulin-resistant db/db mice, in fat-1 transgene coding for desaturation of (n-6) PUFA into (n-3) PUFA, in db/db crossed with fat-1 mice, and in control mice. Diabesity resulted in increased colonic proliferation and dedifferentiation of epithelial colonocytes and goblet cells, with increased colonic β-catenin and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4α transcriptional activities accompanied by enrichment in HNF-4α-bound (n-6) PUFA. In contrast, in fat-1 mice, colonic proliferation was restrained, accompanied by differentiation of crypt stem cells into epithelial colonocytes and goblet cells and by decrease in colonic β-catenin and HNF-4α transcriptional activities, with concomitant enrichment in HNF-4α-bound (n-3) PUFA at the expense of (n-6) PUFA. Colonic proliferation and differentiation, the profile of β-catenin and HNF-4α-responsive genes, and the composition of HNF-4α-bound PUFA of db/db mice reverted to wild-type by introducing the fat-1 gene into the db/db context. Suppression of intestinal HNF-4α activity by (n-3) PUFA may ameliorate diabesity-induced intestinal ontogenesis and offer an effective preventive modality for colorectal cancer.
Obesity, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes have reached epidemic proportions, from the term: diabesity. Vitamin A is delivered by a specific binding protein called retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4) a soluble protein, emerging to have a role in insulin resistance, the major cause of diabetes is highly associated with adipose tissue inflammation and obesity with action. RBP4, interacts with two receptors, the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and the plasma membrane protein are stimulated by retinoic acid 6 (STRA6), leading to the activation of c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) pathways and JAK2/STAT5 cascade, respectively. Both mechanisms sustain insulin resistance. Therefore, ablation of STRA6 protects mice from RBP4-induced suppression of insulin signaling. In addition, mice harboring deletion of a specific chaperon for retinol, show infiltration of α-cells in the core of pancreatic islets, where usually only β-cells reside, showing a pre-diabetic like phenotype. Not only proteins in vitamin A shuttle and signaling are emerging in diabesity, recently, the discovery of 9cis retinoic acid (9cRA) with effects on controlling glucose levels have opened a new scenario. So far, only pancreas β-cells have been shown to synthesize it, and high levels of 9cRA correlate with obesity mice models. In this article, we summarize the recent literature present on this topic raising the hypothesis. 
Diabesity is a modern epidemic, which indicates the coexistence of both diabetes and obesity. Linked by various pathophysiological mechanisms, revolving around insulin resistance and hyperinsulinaemia, diabesity has important diagnostic and therapeutic implications. This review describes the important associations of diabesity, and highlights the various ono-pharmacological and pharmacological methods of management. It makes a strong call for utilising indigenous, low cost means of enhancing healthy dietary and physical activity habits.
Recent studies have established that the neonate born to a pregnancy with maternal diabetes or obesity ('diabesity') is characterized by increased fat accumulation. The neonatal fat is the result of triglyceride synthesis and deposition stimulated by elevated fetal insulin levels combined with insulin's mitogenic activity directly stimulating the growth of the white adipocytes. Fetal insulin levels are determined by fetal glucose and some amino acids such as arginine. Although the placenta plays a key role in providing maternally derived nutrients to the growing fetus, there is currently no evidence that it actively contributes to an excessive maternal-to-fetal glucose flux at the end of gestation. Early in gestation, the maternal environment in diabesity, and in particular the glucose-insulin axis, can modify placental growth and development, which may contribute to an enhanced glucose flux to the fetus already early in pregnancy. This may have long-lasting effects on the fetal pancreas and accelerate beta-cell maturation. The association of fetal and neonatal insulin levels and the proportion of body fat with obesity later in the offspring's life calls for interventions during pregnancy to prevent or reduce fetal hyperinsulinaemia. Dietary and/or physical activity interventions initiated before or in early pregnancy would likely be most effective. Results from the very few studies with fetal insulin as the outcome are inconsistent. However, there is a major lack of randomized intervention trials on this topic. 
Chemerin is believed to be a mediator for the adipose tissue inflammation that occurs in obesity. The present study compared chemerin levels between healthy and type 2 diabetic women matched for age and body composition. We also aimed to assess the relationship of serum chemerin levels with body composition, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and diabesity.
This observational case-control study was conducted at the Departments of Physiology and Medicine, Saud University Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, from September 2013 to April 2014. A total of 100 subjects were recruited, including 51 adult diabetic females, and a control group consisting of 49 healthy females. Finally, 80 subjects were selected as per inclusion criteria. In the finally selected group, 45 of were type 2 diabetics and 35 were healthy subjects matched for age, body mass index (BMI) and body composition with age ranging between 30-65 years. Body composition analysis was estimated using bioelectrical impendence analyzer. Fasting venous blood samples were analyzed for glycemic markers, lipids, and chemerin. Insulin resistance and sensitivity indices were calculated by HOMA-IR and QUICKI using standard formulas.
The two groups were matched for age, BMI, body fat percentage (BF%), basal metabolic rate (BMR), truncal fat and waist hip ratio (WHR). Serum chemerin levels were higher in diabetics than controls (p=0.001). Systolic blood pressure, weight, fat mass and visceral fat were found to be significantly higher in diabetics when compared to controls. Fasting blood glucose (FBG), glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), triglycerides (TG), insulin and HOMA-IR were significantly higher in diabetics compared to controls. While QUICKI and HDL were significantly lower in diabetics compared to controls. Chemerin levels correlated positively with age (r=0.300, p=0.007), waist hip ratio (r=0.250, p=0.026), weight (r=0.270, p=0.016), BMI (r=0.334, p=0.003), BF% (r=0.325, p=0.003), fat mass (r=0.250, p=0.026), visceral fat (r=0.356, p=0.001), truncal fat mass (r=0.245, p=0.030), truncal fat % (r=0.249, p=0.027), serum basal insulin levels (r=0.354, p=0.001) and HOMA IR (0.275, p=0.015), while it correlated inversely with QUICKI (r=-0.283*, p=0.012). In multiple linear regression analysis age (r=0.236, p=0.023), BF% (r=0.265, p=0.014) and basal insulin levels (r=0.265, p=0.014) were independent predictors of chemerin.
Serum chemerin levels are elevated in patients with type 2 DM compared to healthy control subjects and are positively correlated with adiposity and Insulin resistance in patients with type 2 DM.
The initial discovery of resistin and resistin-like molecules (RELMs) in rodents suggested a role for these adipocytokines in molecular linkage of obesity, Type 2 Diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome. Since then, it became apparent that the story of resistin and RELMs was very much of mice and men. The putative role of this adipokine family evolved from that of a conveyor of insulin resistance in rodents to instigator of inflammatory processes in humans. Structural dissimilarity, variance in distribution profiles and a lack of corroborating evidence for functional similarities separate the biological functions of resistin in humans from that of rodents. Although present in gross visceral fat deposits in humans, resistin is a component of inflammation, being released from infiltrating white blood cells of the sub-clinical chronic low grade inflammatory response accompanying obesity, rather than from the adipocyte itself. This led researchers to further explore the functions of the resistin family of proteins in inflammatory-related conditions such as atherosclerosis, as well as in cancers such as endometrial and gastric cancers. Although elevated levels of resistin have been found in these conditions, whether it is causative or as a result of these conditions still remains to be determined. 
Until recently, the mechanism of adaptive thermogenesis was ascribed to the expression of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) in brown and beige adipocytes. UCP1 is known to catalyze a proton leak of the inner mitochondrial membrane, resulting in uncoupled oxidative metabolism with no production of adenosine triphosphate and increased energy expenditure. Thus increasing brown and beige adipose tissue with augmented UCP1 expression is a viable target for obesity-related disorders. Recent work demonstrates an UCP1-independent pathway to uncouple mitochondrial respiration. A secreted enzyme, PM20D1, enriched in UCP1+ adipocytes, exhibits catalytic and hydrolytic activity to reversibly form N-acyl amino acids. N-acyl amino acids act as endogenous uncouplers of mitochondrial respiration at physiological concentrations. Administration of PM20D1 or its products, N-acyl amino acids, to diet-induced obese mice improves glucose tolerance by increasing energy expenditure. In short-term studies, treated animals exhibit no toxicity while experiencing 10% weight loss primarily of adipose tissue. Further study of this metabolic pathway may identify novel therapies for diabesity, the disease state associated with diabetes and obesity. 
Obesity is a prominent risk factor for type 2 diabetes. Management of type 2 diabetes requires weight management in addition to glycemic parameters. For obese type 2 diabetes patients, metformin, Sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors or Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists should be prescribed as the first priority for controlling both hyperglycemia and body weight or fat distribution. The Combination of these drugs with sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones, and insulin may also be required in chronic cases. These drugs cause weight gain. Fortunately, many phytochemicals having a beneficial effect on diabetes and obesity, have minimum side-effects as compared to synthetic drugs. This review discusses the treatment strategies for controlling glycemia and weight management, with the focus on anti-diabetic drugs and phytochemicals. Glucagonostatic role, activation of Adenosine monophosphate activated protein kinase and adipocyte targeting potential of anti-diabetic drugs and phytochemicals are also discussed.
Epidemiological data have shown long-term health adversity in low birth weight subjects, especially concerning the metabolic syndrome and 'diabesity' risk. Alterations in adult food intake have been suggested to be causally involved. Responsible mechanisms remain unclear.
By rearing in normal (NL) vs. small litters (SL), small-for-gestational-age (SGA) rats were neonatally exposed to either normal (SGA-in-NL) or over-feeding (SGA-in-SL), and followed up into late adult age as compared to normally reared appropriate-for-gestational-age control rats (AGA-in-NL). SGA-in-SL rats displayed rapid neonatal weight gain within one week after birth, while SGA-in-NL growth caught up only at juvenile age (day 60), as compared to AGA-in-NL controls. In adulthood, an increase in lipids, leptin, insulin, insulin/glucose-ratio (all p<0.05), and hyperphagia under normal chow as well as high-energy/high-fat diet, modelling modern 'westernized' lifestyle, were observed only in SGA-in-SL as compared to both SGA-in-NL and AGA-in-NL rats (p<0.05). Lasercapture microdissection (LMD)-based neuropeptide expression analyses in single neuron pools of the arcuate hypothalamic nucleus (ARC) revealed a significant shift towards down-regulation of the anorexigenic melanocortinergic system (proopiomelanocortin, Pomc) in SGA-in-SL rats (p<0.05). Neuropeptide expression within the orexigenic system (neuropeptide Y (Npy), agouti-related-peptide (Agrp) and galanin (Gal)) was not significantly altered. In essence, the 'orexigenic index', proposed here as a neuroendocrine 'net-indicator', was increased in SGA-in-SL regarding Npy/Pomc expression (p<0.01), correlated to food intake (p<0.05).
Adult SGA rats developed increased 'diabesity' risk only if exposed to neonatal overfeeding. Hypothalamic malprogramming towards decreased anorexigenic activity was involved into the pathophysiology of this neonatally acquired adverse phenotype. Neonatal overfeeding appears to be a critical long-term risk factor in 'small-for-gestational-age babies'.
Induction of skeletal muscle (SM) mitochondrial stress by expression of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) in mice results in a healthy metabolic phenotype associated with increased secretion of FGF21 from SM. Here, we investigated whether SM mitochondrial uncoupling can compensate obesity and insulin resistance in the NZO mouse, a polygenic diabesity model. Male NZO mice were crossed with heterozygous UCP1 transgenic (tg) mice (mixed C57BL/6/CBA background) and further backcrossed to obtain F1 and N2 offspring with 50 and 75 % NZO background, respectively. Male F1 and N2 progeny were fed a high-fat diet ad libitum for 20 weeks from weaning. Blood glucose was reduced, and diabetes (severe hyperglycemia >300 mg/dl) was fully prevented in both F1- and N2-tg progeny compared to a diabetes prevalence of 15 % in F1 and 42 % in N2 wild type. In contrast, relative body fat content and plasma insulin were decreased, and glucose tolerance was improved, in F1-tg only. Both F1 and N2-tg showed decreased lean body mass. Accordingly, induction of SM stress response including FGF21 expression and secretion was similar in both F1 and N2-tg mice. In white adipose tissue, expression of FGF21 target genes was enhanced in F1 and N2-tg mice, whereas lipid metabolism genes were induced in F1-tg only. There was no evidence for induction of browning in either UCP1 backcross. We conclude that SM mitochondrial uncoupling induces FGF21 expression and prevents diabetes in mice with a 50-75 % NZO background independent of its effects on adipose tissue. 
Obesity and type 2 diabetes have not only been linked to fatty liver, but also to fatty kidney and chronic kidney disease. Since non-invasive tools are lacking to study fatty kidney in clinical studies, we explored agreement between proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) and enzymatic assessment of renal triglyceride content (without and with dietary intervention). We further studied the correlation between fatty kidney and fatty liver.
Triglyceride content in the renal cortex was measured by 1H-MRS on a 7-Tesla scanner in 27 pigs, among which 15 minipigs had been randomized to a 7-month control diet, cafeteria diet (CAF) or CAF with low-dose streptozocin (CAF-S) to induce insulin-independent diabetes. Renal biopsies were taken from corresponding MRS-voxel locations. Additionally, liver biopsies were taken and triglyceride content in all biopsies was measured by enzymatic assay.
Renal triglyceride content measured by 1H-MRS and enzymatic assay correlated positively (r = 0.86, P < 0.0001). Compared with control diet-fed minipigs, renal triglyceride content was higher in CAF-S-fed minipigs (137 ± 51 nmol/mg protein, mean ± standard error of the mean, P < 0.05), but not in CAF-fed minipigs (60 ± 10 nmol/mg protein) compared with controls (40 ± 6 nmol/mg protein). Triglyceride contents in liver and kidney biopsies were strongly correlated (r = 0.97, P < 0.001).
Non-invasive measurement of renal triglyceride content by 1H-MRS closely predicts triglyceride content as measured enzymatically in biopsies, and fatty kidney appears to develop parallel to fatty liver. 1H-MRS may be a valuable tool to explore the role of fatty kidney in obesity and type 2 diabetic nephropathy in humans in vivo.
Gut hormones have long been understood to regulate food intake and metabolism. Bariatric surgery significantly elevates circulating gut hormone levels and is proven to affect acute remission of type 2 diabetes before any weight loss is observed. Subsequent weight loss is accrued over weeks to months but is sustained into the long term. Hence, there exists great enthusiasm to recapitulate these changes in gut hormones in the form of novel combination drugs for type 2 diabetes and obesity.
Emerging evidence suggests female type 2 diabetes (T2DM) patients may fare worse than males with respect to cardiovascular complications. Hence the impact of sex on relative progression of left ventricular (LV) remodeling in obese db/db mice was characterized.
The changes in parameters of LV hypertrophy (heart weight, pro-hypertrophic gene expression, cardiomyocyte size) and fibrosis (LV collagen deposition and oxidative stress), in parallel with body weight and blood glucose and lipid profiles, in male and female db/db T2DM mice, at 10, 14, and 18 weeks of age, were determined.
Diabesity-induced cardiac remodeling was at least comparable in female (compared to male) mice. Females exhibited enhanced systemic oxidative stress and nonesterified fatty acid levels. Progression of LV pro-hypertrophic (β-myosin heavy chain, B-type natriuretic peptide) and pro-oxidant gene expression (NADPH oxidase subunit Nox2, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 PAI-I) was, however, exaggerated in females when expressed relative to 10-week-old db/db mice. Increased cardiomyocyte width was also evident earlier in db/db females than males. No other gender differences were observed.
Progressive, age-dependent development of cardiac remodeling in db/db mice parallels impairments in glucose handling and oxidative stress. Certain aspects of the T2DM-induced LV remodeling response may have an earlier and/or exaggerated onset in diabetic females.
The onset and progression of diabetes mellitus type 2 is highly contingent on the amount of functional beta-cell mass. An underlying cause of beta-cell decay in diabetes is oxidative stress, which markedly affects the insulin producing pancreatic cells due to their poor antioxidant defence capacity. Consequently, disturbances of cellular redox signaling have been implicated to play a major role in beta-cell loss in diabetes mellitus type 2. There is evidence suggesting that the glutaredoxin (Grx) system exerts a protective role for pancreatic islets, but the exact mechanisms have not yet been elucidated. In this study, a mouse model for diabetes mellitus type 2 was used to gain further insight into the significance of Grx for the islets of Langerhans in the diabetic metabolism. We have observed distinct differences in the expression levels of Grx in pancreatic islets between obese, diabetic db mice and lean, non-diabetic controls. This finding is the first report about a decrease of Grx expression levels in pancreatic islets of diabetic mice which was accompanied by declining insulin secretion, increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production level, and cell cycle alterations. These data demonstrate the essential role of the Grx system for the beta-cell during metabolic stress which may provide a new target for diabetes mellitus type 2 treatment.
Diabetes type 2 and obesity are well-established global epidemics and contributors to clinical, social and economic health burdens. The prevalence rates of these diseases are still on the rise among countries resulting in a corresponding public health burden. The Mediterranean island of Malta, known for it's high diabetes and obesity rates, provides a good fundamental basis to portray the economical health burden of these diseases.
A recent randomised stratified representative cross-sectional survey conducted in Malta tackling diabetes, obesity and other determinants, was used to work out the population prevalence of these diseases. The cost burden of diabetes and obesity, based on published data, was incorporated to the established population prevalence rates, in order to estimate the Maltese economical burden. Projections to the year 2050 by a bottom-up prevalence based design were performed.
One eight of the Maltese adults (25 to 64 years) suffered from diabetes out of which approximately 10,000 adults were unaware of the disease. Alarmingly, more than a third of the Maltese population suffer from obesity. The approximate health care costs (direct and indirect) for the diabetic adult population was of €29,159,217 (€21,994,676 - €38,919,121) annually, amounting to 3.64% (2.75-4.875%) of the total health expenditure in Malta. The obesity cost burden was of €23,732,781 (€21,514,972-€26,049,204) annually contributing for 2.97% (2.69-3.26%) of the total health expenditure. The projected prevalence and costs for 2050 exhibited an estimated cost burden increase of €33,751,487 (€25,458,606-€45,048,473) for the diabetes mellitus population and €46,532,294 (€42,183,889-€51,074,049) for the obese population. These projected cost burdens are expected to increase exponentially the total health care expenditure in Malta by 2050.
Having an understanding of the prevalence and the economic cost burden of diabetes and obesity within a country, along with projections of the expected burden will enable policy and public health officials to clearly visualize this growing problem. It also helps in establishing effective preventive strategies and screening programs targeting these epidemics.
Obesity-associated diabetes ("diabesity") in mouse strains is characterized by severe insulin resistance, hyperglycaemia and progressive failure, and loss of beta cells. This condition is observed in inbred obese mouse strains such as the New Zealand Obese (NZO/HlLt and NZO/HlBomDife) or the TALLYHO/JngJ mouse. In lean strains such as C57BLKS/J, BTBR T+tf/J or DBA/2 J carrying diabetes susceptibility genes ("diabetes susceptible" background), it can be induced by introgression of the obesity-causing mutations Lep <ob> (ob) or Lepr <db> (db). Outcross populations of these models have been employed in the genome-wide search for mouse diabetes genes, and have led to positional cloning of the strong candidates Pctp, Tbc1d1, Zfp69, and Ifi202b (NZO-derived obesity) and Sorcs1, Lisch-like, Tomosyn-2, App, Tsc2, and Ube2l6 (obesity caused by the ob or db mutation). Some of these genes have been shown to play a role in the regulation of the human glucose or lipid metabolism. Thus, dissection of the genetic basis of obesity and diabetes in mouse models can identify regulatory mechanisms that are relevant for the human disease.
Antagonism of the gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) receptor with daily injection of proline-3 gastric inhibitory polypeptide ((Pro(3))GIP) can reverse or prevent many of the metabolic abnormalities associated with diet-induced obesity-diabetes (diabesity). This study has examined the ability of a novel and longer-acting form of (Pro(3))GIP, (Pro(3))GIP mini-polyethylene glycol ((Pro(3))GIP[mPEG]), to counter diet-induced diabesity in mice, using a daily and intermittent dosing regime.
We studied the actions of (Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] at the GIP receptor in vitro and in vivo in both dietary and genetic diabesity.
(Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] was completely resistant to degradation by dipeptidyl peptidase IV. (Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] inhibited GIP-induced cAMP and insulin production in vitro. A greater and prolonged antagonism of GIP-induced glucose-lowering action was followed (Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] administration, compared with (Pro(3))GIP. In contrast with (Pro(3))GIP, mice injected once every 3 days for 48 days with (Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] displayed reduced body weight gain and hyperinsulinemia with improved glucose tolerance and insulin secretory responses, compared with high-fat-fed controls. Daily i.p. injection of (Pro(3))GIP, (Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] or (Pro(3))GIP b.i.d. for 21 days also decreased body weight, circulating plasma insulin levels and improved glucose tolerance, compared with high-fat controls. Plasma triglycerides were decreased by (Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] and (Pro(3))GIP b.i.d. treatment groups. The observed changes were accompanied by enhancement of insulin sensitivity in all treatment regimes. (Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] was also effective over 16 days treatment of genetically obese-diabetic ob/ob mice.
These data demonstrate the utility of GIP receptor antagonism for the treatment of diabesity and the potential offered by (Pro(3))GIP[mPEG] as a long-acting stable GIP receptor antagonist.
Obesity, characterized by low grade inflammation, induces adipose tissue macrophage (ATM) infiltration in white adipose tissue (AT) in both humans and rodents, thus contributing to insulin resistance. Previous studies have shown altered prolactin secretion in obesity, however, studies linking ATM infiltration and prolactin (PRL) secretion to the pathogenesis of the metabolic syndrome, obesity and diabetes are lacking.
In vivo, qPCR and Western blot analysis demonstrated that prolactin expression was increased in AT of obese rats and also in human AT from obese, obese pre-diabetic and obese diabetic compared to lean counterparts. Immunohistochemistry of obese rat and human AT sections demonstrated a specific expression of prolactin in macrophages. In vitro, we demonstrated that hyperglycemia and inflammation stimulated macrophages (human THP-1 cell line and sorted rat ATM) to express PRL, when challenged with different glucose concentrations with or without IL1β. In in vivo and in vitro experiments, we assessed the expression of Pit-1 (PRL-specific transcription factor) and found that its expression was parallel to PRL expression.
In this study, we show that rodent and human macrophages synthesize prolactin in response to inflammation and high glucose concentrations.
Our data shed new light on the potential role of macrophages in the physiopathology of diabesity via the PRL expression and on its expression mechanism and regulation.
MMP11 overexpression is a bad prognostic factor in various human carcinomas. Interestingly, this proteinase is not expressed in malignant cells themselves but is secreted by adjacent non-malignant mesenchymal/stromal cells, such as cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and adipocytes (CAAs), which favors cancer cell survival and progression. As MMP11 negatively regulates adipogenesis in vitro, we hypothesized that it may play a role in whole body metabolism and energy homeostasis. We used an in vivo gain- (Mmp11-Tg mice) and loss- (Mmp11-/- mice) of-function approach to address the systemic function of MMP11. Strikingly, MMP11 overexpression protects against type 2 diabetes while Mmp11-/- mice exhibit hallmarks of metabolic syndrome. Moreover, Mmp11-Tg mice were protected from diet-induced obesity and display mitochondrial dysfunction, due to oxidative stress, and metabolic switch from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis. This Warburg-like effect observed in adipose tissues might provide a rationale for the deleterious impact of CAA-secreted MMP11, favouring tumor progression. MMP11 overexpression also leads to increased circulating IGF1 levels and the activation of the IGF1/AKT/FOXO1 cascade, an important metabolic signalling pathway. Our data reveal a major role for MMP11 in controlling energy metabolism, and provide new clues for understanding the relationship between metabolism, cancer progression and patient outcome.
This opinionated evidence-based selective review addresses flawed concepts related to "obesity", bariatric surgery and approaches to treatment and prevention of a dysmetabolic syndrome of overnutrition and underactivity from the perspective of developmental origins of diseases prevalent in mid-life and beyond. Innovations focus on methods affecting appetite regulation and energy expenditure applicable throughout the life-cycle on the individual level but with transgenerational population-wide implications. Readers can expect new knowledge and enhanced understanding of a global health problem: "diabesity". 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus associated with obesity, or "diabesity", coincides with an altered nitric oxide (NO) metabolism in skeletal muscle. Three isoforms of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) exist in human skeletal muscle tissue. Both neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) are constitutively expressed under physiological conditions, producing low levels of NO, while the inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) is strongly up-regulated only under pathophysiological conditions, excessively increasing NO concentrations. Due to chronic inflammation, overweight/obese type 2 diabetic patients exhibit up-regulated protein contents of iNOS and concomitant elevated amounts of NO in skeletal muscle. Low muscular NO levels are important for attaining an adequate cellular redox state--thereby maintaining metabolic integrity--while high NO levels are believed to destroy cellular components and to disturb metabolic processes, e.g., through strongly augmented posttranslational protein S-nitrosylation. Physical training with submaximal intensity has been shown to attenuate inflammatory profiles and iNOS protein contents in the long term. The present review summarizes signaling pathways which induce iNOS up-regulation under pathophysiological conditions and describes molecular mechanisms by which high NO concentrations are likely to contribute to triggering skeletal muscle insulin resistance and to reducing mitochondrial capacity during the development and progression of type 2 diabetes. Based on this information, it discusses the beneficial effects of regular physical exercise on the altered NO metabolism in the skeletal muscle of overweight/obese type 2 diabetic subjects, thus unearthing new perspectives on training strategies for this particular patient group.
To investigate effects of long-term testosterone (T) therapy in obese men with T deficiency (TD) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), data were collected from two observational, prospective, and cumulative registry studies of 561 men with TD receiving T therapy for up to 6 years. A subgroup of obese hypogonadal men with T2DM was analyzed. Weight, height, waist circumference (WC), fasting blood glucose (FBG), glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) blood pressure, lipid profile, C-reactive protein (CRP), and liver enzymes were measured. A total of 156 obese, diabetic men with T deficiency, aged 61.17 ± 6.18 years, fulfilled selection criteria. Subsequent to T therapy, WC decreased by 11.56 cm and weight declined by 17.49 kg (15.04%). Fasting glucose declined from 7.06 ± 1.74 to 5.59 ± 0.94 mmol/L (P < 0.0001 for all). HbA1c decreased from 8.08 to 6.14%, with a mean change of 1.93%. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure, lipid profiles including total cholesterol: HDL ratio, CRP, and liver enzymes all improved (P < 0.0001). Long-term T therapy for up to 6 years resulted in significant and sustained improvements in weight, T2DM, and other cardiometabolic risk factors in obese, diabetic men with TD and this therapy may play an important role in the management of obesity and diabetes (diabesity) in men with T deficiency. 
The goal of this study was to design, develop, and evaluate a game for health, "Gustavo in Gnam's Planet" ("Gustavo"), aimed to improve knowledge on healthy foods and to increase consumption of healthy foods.
Eighty-three high school students were enrolled in the study. The game was designed and developed by a multidisciplinary team. Behavioral change theories were adopted to guide the design of the health messages. Participants were assessed about food frequency, healthy food knowledge, and the game's interest.
Forty-seven subjects (mean age, 14.9±1.0 years; 72.3 percent males) completed the study. At posttest, participants showed significant higher scores (i.e., increased knowledge) in the questionnaire on knowledge of healthy foods (70.0±9.2 versus 71.3±10.0 for pretest and posttest, respectively; P<0.05). Improvements in healthy eating habits were also detected: higher frequency of consumption during a week of white meat (1 [1-2] versus 2 [1-2]; P=0.01), eggs (1 [1-1] versus 1 [1-2]; P=0.01], and legumes (1 [0-1] versus 1 [1-2]; P=0.03) and lower frequency of consumption of sugar-containing packaged snacks (1 [0-1] versus 0 [0-1]; P=0.009). Most of the participants found the game easy to use and clear in its content. Half of the participants found the game interesting.
Our study shows that "Gustavo" is a promising tool for health education, in schools or in other environments. Limitations of the study and future directions are discussed.
Background Exercise rehabilitation is highly recommended by current guidelines on prevention of cardiovascular disease, but its implementation is still poor. Many clinicians experience difficulties in prescribing exercise in the presence of different concomitant cardiovascular diseases and risk factors within the same patient. It was aimed to develop a digital training and decision support system for exercise prescription in cardiovascular disease patients in clinical practice: the European Association of Preventive Cardiology Exercise Prescription in Everyday Practice and Rehabilitative Training (EXPERT) tool. Methods EXPERT working group members were requested to define (a) diagnostic criteria for specific cardiovascular diseases, cardiovascular disease risk factors, and other chronic non-cardiovascular conditions, (b) primary goals of exercise intervention, (c) disease-specific prescription of exercise training (intensity, frequency, volume, type, session and programme duration), and (d) exercise training safety advices. The impact of exercise tolerance, common cardiovascular medications and adverse events during exercise testing were further taken into account for optimized exercise prescription. Results Exercise training recommendations and safety advices were formulated for 10 cardiovascular diseases, five cardiovascular disease risk factors (type 1 and 2 diabetes, obesity, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia), and three common chronic non-cardiovascular conditions (lung and renal failure and sarcopaenia), but also accounted for baseline exercise tolerance, common cardiovascular medications and occurrence of adverse events during exercise testing. An algorithm, supported by an interactive tool, was constructed based on these data. This training and decision support system automatically provides an exercise prescription according to the variables provided. Conclusion This digital training and decision support system may contribute in overcoming barriers in exercise implementation in common cardiovascular diseases.
Earlobe creases are surrogate markers for high risk of cardiovascular disease. There is no data concerning earlobe creases among hemodialysis patients, who have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. A cross-sectional study was conducted to determine the prevalence of earlobe creases and their association with prevalent cardiovascular disease among hemodialysis patients. Patients undergoing hemodialysis were recruited from five outpatient hemodialysis centers. Both earlobes were photographed during a dialysis session with the patient in a supine position and the photos evaluated independently by two experienced nephrologists blinded to the participants' clinical characteristics. Prevalent cardiovascular diseases were defined as a history of myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accident, or peripheral vascular disease. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values for detection of prevalent cardiovascular disease were calculated. Logistic analysis was used to examine the association between earlobe creases and prevalent cardiovascular disease. Earlobe creases were identified in 24.5% of 330 hemodialysis patients (200 men; mean age, 67.8 years). The prevalence of earlobe creases increased with age for men (P for trend <0.0001), but not for women (P for trend = 0.07). Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values were 30.9% (95% confidence interval, 21.9-41.6), 77.5% (71.9-82.3), 30.9% (21.9-41.6), and 77.5% (71.9-82.3), respectively. Multivariate logistic analyses indicated the prevalence of earlobe crease was not associated with prevalent cardiovascular diseases. The prevalence is similar to that previously reported for Japanese individuals not undergoing dialysis. No association between earlobe creases and prevalent cardiovascular diseases was identified.
Multiple randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have assessed the effects of supplementation with eicosapentaenoic acid plus docosahexaenoic acid (omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, commonly called fish oils) on the occurrence of clinical cardiovascular diseases. Although the effects of supplementation for the primary prevention of clinical cardiovascular events in the general population have not been examined, RCTs have assessed the role of supplementation in secondary prevention among patients with diabetes mellitus and prediabetes, patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease, and those with prevalent coronary heart disease. In this scientific advisory, we take a clinical approach and focus on common indications for omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid supplements related to the prevention of clinical cardiovascular events. We limited the scope of our review to large RCTs of supplementation with major clinical cardiovascular disease end points; meta-analyses were considered secondarily. We discuss the features of available RCTs and provide the rationale for our recommendations. We then use existing American Heart Association criteria to assess the strength of the recommendation and the level of evidence. On the basis of our review of the cumulative evidence from RCTs designed to assess the effect of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation on clinical cardiovascular events, we update prior recommendations for patients with prevalent coronary heart disease, and we offer recommendations, when data are available, for patients with other clinical indications, including patients with diabetes mellitus and prediabetes and those with high risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke, heart failure, and atrial fibrillation.
In this second part of a 2-part series on the global burden of cardiovascular disease, we review the proven, effective approaches to the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease. We specifically review the management of acute cardiovascular diseases, including acute coronary syndromes and stroke; the care of cardiovascular disease in the ambulatory setting, including medical strategies for vascular disease, atrial fibrillation, and heart failure; surgical strategies for arterial revascularization, rheumatic and other valvular heart disease, and symptomatic bradyarrhythmia; and approaches to the prevention of cardiovascular disease, including lifestyle factors, blood pressure control, cholesterol-lowering, antithrombotic therapy, and fixed-dose combination therapy. We also discuss cardiovascular disease prevention in diabetes mellitus; digital health interventions; the importance of socioeconomic status and universal health coverage. We review building capacity for conduction cardiovascular intervention through strengthening healthcare systems, priority setting, and the role of cost effectiveness.
Loneliness and depression have a strong reciprocal influence, and both predict adverse health outcomes at old age. Therefore, this study examines whether loneliness is associated with the presence of cardiovascular diseases taking into account the role of late-life depression.
Cross-sectional data of 477 older adults in the Netherlands Study of Depressed Older Persons were used. Logistic regression analysis was performed to examine the relation between loneliness and cardiovascular disease. Depression was added to the regression model to examine whether depression is an explanatory factor in the association between loneliness and cardiovascular disease. Interaction terms between loneliness and depression and between loneliness and sex were introduced in the regression model to investigate whether depressed and non-depressed participants, and men and women differed in their association between loneliness and cardiovascular disease.
Of the overall group, 61% were lonely, 28% had a history of cardiovascular disease and 74% were depressed. Loneliness and cardiovascular disease were not associated in the overall group after adjustment for confounders (continuous: odds ratio [OR] = 1.04, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.98-1.10), p = 0.25; dichotomous: OR = 1.27, 95% CI = 0.80-2.03, p = 0.32). For women, there was an association between loneliness and cardiovascular diseases (continuous: OR = 1.13, 95% CI = 1.06-1.21, p < 0.001; dichotomous: OR = 2.64, 95% CI = 1.50-4.65, p = 0.001), but this association was not present in men (OR = 0.96, 95% CI = 0.88-1.05, p = 0.38). This association remained significant after adjustment for confounders, but it lost significance after adding depression to the model.
For women only, there was an association between loneliness and cardiovascular disease. However, this association was explained by depression, indicating that loneliness in its own right seems not related with cardiovascular disease. Copyright © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Background We evaluated the association of cardiac adipose tissue including epicardial adipose tissue and pericardial adipose tissue with incident cardiovascular disease and mortality, coronary artery calcium, carotid intima media thickness and inflammatory markers. Design A prospective study of 200 patients with type 2 diabetes and elevated urinary albumin excretion rate (UAER). Methods Cardiac adipose tissue was measured from baseline echocardiography. The composite endpoint comprised incident cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality. Coronary artery calcium, carotid intima media thickness and inflammatory markers were measured at baseline. Cardiac adipose tissue was investigated as continuous and binary variable. Analyses were performed unadjusted (model 1), and adjusted for age, sex (model 2), body mass index, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, smoking, glycated haemoglobin, and systolic blood pressure (model 3). Results Patients were followed-up after 6.1 years for non-fatal cardiovascular disease ( n = 29) or mortality ( n = 23). Cardiac adipose tissue ( p = 0.049) and epicardial adipose tissue ( p = 0.029) were associated with cardiovascular disease and mortality in model 1. When split by the median, patients with high cardiac adipose tissue had a higher risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality than patients with low cardiac adipose tissue in unadjusted (hazard ratio 1.9, confidence interval: 1.1; 3.4, p = 0.027) and adjusted (hazard ratio 2.0, confidence interval: 1.1; 3.7, p = 0.017) models. Cardiac adipose tissue ( p =  0.033) was associated with baseline coronary artery calcium (model 1) and interleukin-8 (models 1-3, all p < 0.039). Conclusions In type 2 diabetes patients without coronary artery disease, high cardiac adipose tissue levels were associated with increased risk of incident cardiovascular disease or all-cause mortality even after accounting for traditional cardiovascular disease risk factors. High cardiac adipose tissue amounts were associated with subclinical atherosclerosis (coronary artery calcium) and with the pro-atherogenic inflammatory marker interleukin-8.
Background Exercise is the cornerstone of rehabilitation programmes for individuals with cardiovascular disease (IwCVD). Although conventional cardiovascular rehabilitation (CCVR) programmes have significant advantages, non-conventional activities such as Nordic walking (NW) may offer additional health benefits. Our aim was to appraise research evidence on the effects of Nordic walking for individuals with cardiovascular disease. Design Systematic review and meta-analysis. Methods A literature search of clinical databases (PubMed, MEDLINE, Scopus, Web of Science, Cochrane) was conducted to identify any randomized controlled trials, including: (i) individuals with cardiovascular disease, (ii) analyses of the main outcomes arising from Nordic walking (NW) programmes. Data from the common outcomes were extracted and pooled in the meta-analysis. Standardized mean differences (SMDs) were calculated and pooled by random effects models. Results Fifteen randomized controlled trials were included and eight trials entered this meta-analysis. Studies focused on coronary artery disease, peripheral arterial disease, heart failure and stroke. In coronary artery disease, significant differences between NW+CCVR and CCVR were found in exercise capacity (SMD: 0.49; p = 0.03) and dynamic balance (SMD: 0.55; p = 0.01) favouring NW+CCVR. In peripheral artery disease, larger changes in exercise duration (SMD: 0.93; p < 0.0001) and oxygen uptake (SMD: 0.64; p = 0.002) were observed following NW compared with controls. In heart failure, no significant differences were found between NW and CCVR or usual care for peak VO<sub>2</sub> and functional mobility. In post-stroke survivors, functional mobility was significantly higher following treadmill programmes with poles rather than without (SMD: 0.80; p = 0.03). Conclusions These data portray NW as a feasible and promising activity for individuals with cardiovascular disease. Further studies are necessary to verify whether NW may be incorporated within CCVR for individuals with cardiovascular disease.
Aims To explore the predictive and explanatory factors on the incidence of cardiovascular disease and the impact of visit-to-visit variability (VVV) of risk factors on incident cardiovascular disease in people with type 2 diabetes with no history of prior cardiovascular disease. Methods We performed a historical cohort study (2008-2011) on 481 people with type 2 diabetes and no history of cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular risk factors were assessed at baseline and repeatedly during follow-up. The predictive analysis included the variables at enrollment, and explanatory analyses were based on mean of the variables measured repeatedly. VVV of the main variables was measured using the standard deviation and coefficient of variation of the measured variables. Separate multivariate binary logistic models were constructed for each parameter with the incident cardiovascular disease. Results Mean age of the participants was 54.9 years, mean glycated hemoglobin was 56 mmol/mol, and mean blood pressure was 125/78 mmHg. Incident cardiovascular disease developed in 14.3% of the participants. The 2-h post breakfast blood glucose was associated with incident cardiovascular disease (odds ratio 1.44; confidence interval = 1.08-1.90; p = 0.01). For each 1 mmol/l increase in postprandial glucose there was a 44% increase in risk of incident cardiovascular disease. VVV of glycemic indices, blood pressure, lipids, body mass index and creatinine were not associated with occurrence of cardiovascular events. Conclusion In this population of patients with type 2 diabetes and no history of cardiovascular disease in whom other cardiovascular risk factors are within or near to the recommended targets, 2-h post breakfast blood glucose level is associated with incident cardiovascular disease.
Blood pressure is a major cause of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and both may increase as outdoor temperatures fall. However, there are still limited data about seasonal variation in blood pressure and CVD mortality among patients with prior-CVD.
We analysed data on 23 000 individuals with prior-CVD who were recruited from 10 diverse regions into the China Kadoorie Biobank during 2004-8. After 7 years of follow-up, 1484 CVD deaths were recorded. Baseline survey data were used to assess seasonal variation in systolic blood pressure (SBP) and its association with outdoor temperature. Cox regression was used to examine the association of usual SBP with subsequent CVD mortality, and seasonal variation in CVD mortality was assessed by Poisson regression. All analyses were adjusted for age, sex, and region.
Mean SBP was significantly higher in winter than in summer (145 vs. 136 mmHg, P < 0.001), especially among those without central heating. Above 5°C, each 10°C lower outdoor temperature was associated with 6.2 mmHg higher SBP. Systolic blood pressure predicted subsequent CVD mortality, with each 10 mmHg higher usual SBP associated with 21% (95% confidence interval: 16-27%) increased risk. Cardiovascular disease mortality varied by season, with 41% (21-63%) higher risk in winter compared with summer.
Among adult Chinese with prior-CVD, there is both increased blood pressure and CVD mortality in winter. Careful monitoring and more aggressive blood pressure lowering treatment in the cold months are needed to help reduce the winter excess CVD mortality in high-risk individuals.
Given the recent declines in heart attack and stroke incidence, it is unclear how women and men differ in first lifetime presentations of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). We compared the incidence of 12 cardiac, cerebrovascular, and peripheral vascular diseases in women and men at different ages.
We studied 1 937 360 people, aged ≥ 30 years and free from diagnosed CVD at baseline (51% women), using linked electronic health records covering primary care, hospital admissions, acute coronary syndrome registry, and mortality (Cardiovascular Research Using LInked Bespoke Studies and Electronic Records [CALIBER] research platform). During 6 years median follow-up between 1997 and 2010, 114 859 people experienced an incident cardiovascular diagnosis, the majority (66%) of which were neither myocardial infarction nor ischemic stroke. Associations of male sex with initial diagnoses of CVD, however, varied from strong (age-adjusted hazard ratios, 3.6-5.0) for abdominal aortic aneurysm, myocardial infarction, and unheralded coronary death (particularly >60 years), through modest (hazard ratio, 1.5-2.0) for stable angina, ischemic stroke, peripheral arterial disease, heart failure, and cardiac arrest, to weak (hazard ratio <1.5) for transient ischemic attack, intracerebral hemorrhage, and unstable angina, and inverse (0.69) for subarachnoid hemorrhage (all P<0.001).
The majority of initial presentations of CVD are neither myocardial infarction nor ischemic stroke, yet most primary prevention studies focus on these presentations. Sex has differing associations with different CVDs, with implications for risk prediction and management strategies.
URL: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT01164371.
Most cardiovascular diseases occur in low- and middle-income regions of the world, but the socioeconomic distribution within China remains unclear. Our study aims to investigate whether the prevalence of cardiovascular diseases differs among high-, middle-, and low-income regions of China and to explore the reasons for the disparities.
We enrolled 46 285 individuals from 115 urban and rural communities in 12 provinces across China between 2005 and 2009. We recorded their medical histories of cardiovascular diseases and calculated the INTERHEART Risk Score for the assessment of cardiovascular risk-factor burden, with higher scores indicating greater burden. The mean INTERHEART Risk Score was higher in high- and middle-income regions than in low-income regions (9.47, 9.48, and 8.58, respectively, P<0.0001). By contrast, the prevalence of total cardiovascular disease (stroke, ischemic heart disease, and other heart diseases that led to hospitalization) was lower in high- and middle-income regions than in low-income regions (7.46%, 7.42%, and 8.36%, respectively, P<sub>trend</sub>=0.0064). In high- and middle-income regions, urban communities have higher INTERHEART Risk Score and higher prevalent rate than rural communities. In low-income regions, however, the prevalence of total cardiovascular disease was similar between urban and rural areas despite the significantly higher INTERHEART Risk Score for urban settings.
We detected an inverse trend between risk-factor burden and cardiovascular disease prevalence in urban and rural communities in high-, middle-, and low-income regions of China. Such asymmetry may be attributed to the interregional differences in residents' awareness, quality of healthcare, and availability and affordability of medical services.
Hispanics account for approximately 17% of the U.S.
They are one of the fastest growing racial/ethnic groups, second only to Asians. This heterogeneous population has diverse socioeconomic conditions, making the prevention, diagnosis, and management of vascular disease difficult. This paper discusses the cultural, racial, and social aspects of the Hispanic community in the United States and assesses how they affect vascular disease within this population. Furthermore, it explores risk factors, medical and surgical treatments, and outcomes of vascular disease in the Hispanic population; generational evolution of these conditions; and the phenomenon called the Hispanic paradox.
A systematic search of the literature was performed to identify all English-language publications from 1991 to 2014 using PubMed, which draws from the National Institutes of Health and U.S. National Library of Medicine, with the words "cardiovascular disease," "prevalence," "vascular," and "Hispanic." An additional search was performed using "cardiovascular disease and Mexico," "cardiovascular disease and Cuba," "cardiovascular disease and Puerto Rico," and "cardiovascular disease and Latin America" as well as for complications, management, outcomes, surgery, vascular disease, and Hispanic paradox. The resulting publications were queried for generational data (spanning multiple well-defined age groups) regarding cardiovascular disease, and cross-references were obtained from their bibliographies. Results are segmented by country of origin.
Compared with non-Hispanic whites, Hispanics face higher risks of cardiovascular diseases because of a high prevalence of high blood pressure, obesity, diabetes mellitus, and ischemic stroke. However, the incidence of peripheral arterial disease and carotid disease appears to be significantly lower than in whites. The Hispanic paradox (lower mortality in spite of higher cardiovascular risk factors) may relate to challenges in ascribing life expectancy and cause of death in this diverse population. Low socioeconomic status and high prevalence of concomitant diseases negatively influence the outcomes of all patients, independent of being Hispanic.
Understanding the cultural diversity in Hispanics is important in terms of targeting preventive measures to modify cardiovascular risk factors, which affect development and outcomes of vascular disease. The available literature regarding vascular disease in the Hispanic population is limited, and further longitudinal study is warranted to improve health care delivery and outcomes in this group.
Burn shock, a complex process, which develops following burn leads to severe and unique derangement of cardiovascular function. Patients with preexisting comorbidities such as cardiovascular diseases may be more susceptible. We therefore sought to examine the impact of preexisting cardiovascular disease on burn outcomes.
A retrospective analysis of patients admitted to a regional burn center from 2002 to 2012. Independent variables analyzed included basic demographics, burn mechanism, presence of inhalation injury, TBSA, pre-existing comorbidities, and length of ICU/hospital stay. Bivariate analysis was performed and Poisson regression modeling was utilized to estimate the incidence of being in the ICU and mortality.
There were a total of 5332 adult patients admitted over the study period. 6% (n=428) had a preexisting cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular disease patients had a higher mortality rate (16%) compared to those without cardiovascular disease (3%, p<0.001). The adjusted Poisson regression model to estimate incidence risk of being in intensive care unit in patients with cardiovascular disease was 33% higher compared to those without cardiovascular disease (IRR=1.33, 95% CI=1.22-1.47). The risk for mortality is 42% higher (IRR=1.42, 95% CI=1.10-1.84) for patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease compared to those without cardiovascular disease after controlling for other covariates.
Preexisting cardiovascular disease significantly increases the risk of intensive care unit admission and mortality in burn patients. Given the increasing number of Americans with cardiovascular diseases, there will likely be a greater number of individuals at risk for worse outcomes following burn. This knowledge can help with burn prognostication.
Background Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia have increased cardiovascular disease mortality but the magnitude of the increased risk is uncertain. The primary aim of this study was to investigate all causes of death and place and manner of deaths in a large sample of genotyped familial hypercholesterolemia patients. Design, methods and results In this registry study data on 5518 patients with genotyped familial hypercholesterolemia were linked to the Norwegian Cause of Death Registry during 1992-2013. Standardized mortality ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated. There were in total 189 deaths. Cardiovascular disease was the most common cause of death (42.3%). Mean age at cardiovascular disease death was 64.5 years (range 33-91). Cardiovascular disease mortality including all cardiovascular disease deaths mentioning any place on the death certificate was significantly higher in familial hypercholesterolemia patients compared to the general Norwegian population under 70 years of age. Standardized mortality ratio (95% CI) was highest in the 20-39 years age group; 4.12 (1.85-9.18) decreasing to 0.77 (0.50-1.19) for those over 80 years. For total cardiovascular disease deaths occurring out of hospital, standardized mortality ratio was 12.35 (5.14-29.70) for those aged 20-39 years. Conclusion Familial hypercholesterolemia patients under 70 years of age have significantly higher cardiovascular disease mortality compared to the general Norwegian population. For those aged 20-39 years the risk of cardiovascular disease deaths occurring out of hospital was increased 12-fold. In spite of genotyped familial hypercholesterolemia and premature cardiovascular disease deaths, the majority of all death certificates did not include familial hypercholesterolemia among any of the contributing causes of death.
Background We evaluated the association of accelerometer-based sedentary behaviour and physical activity with the risk of cardiovascular disease. Design The design of this study used a population-based, cross-sectional sample. Methods A subsample of participants in the Health 2011 Study in Finland used the tri-axial accelerometer (≥4 days, >10 h/day, n = 1398). Sedentary behaviour (sitting, lying) and standing still in six-second epochs were recognised from raw acceleration data based on intensity and device orientation. The intensity of physical activity was calculated as one-minute moving averages of mean amplitude deviation of resultant acceleration and converted to metabolic equivalents. Metabolic equivalents were categorised to light physical activity (1.5-2.9 metabolic equivalents) and moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (moderate-to-vigorous physical activity≥3.0 metabolic equivalents). Daily sedentary behaviour, standing still, light physical activity and moderate-to-vigorous physical activity were expressed as mean daily total time, accumulated time and number of different bouts (from 30 s to >30 min), mean daily metabolic equivalent and weekly peak metabolic equivalent levels of different bout lengths and number of breaks in sedentary behaviour. The ten-year cardiovascular disease risk was based on the Framingham risk model. Results The mean number of daily sedentary behaviour bouts was more strongly associated with cardiovascular disease risk than mean daily total time. In the best model, smaller waist circumference, greater value of mean daily metabolic equivalent levels of one-minute bouts, higher accumulated time of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity lasting ≤30 min, higher number of >5 min standing bouts and a higher number of long (>30 min) bouts of light physical activity were significantly associated with lower cardiovascular disease risk (R<sup>2 </sup>= 0.836). Conclusions The objectively measured number and accumulated time from different bout lengths of physical activity and sedentary behaviour were associated with cardiovascular disease risk, which is considered relevant for estimating cardiovascular diseases and for devising preventive actions.
Although multiple genetic markers associated with blood pressure have been identified by genome-wide association studies, their aggregate effect on risk of incident hypertension and cardiovascular disease is uncertain, particularly among East Asian who may have different genetic and environmental exposures from Europeans. We aimed to examine the association between genetic predisposition to higher blood pressure and risk of incident hypertension and cardiovascular disease in 26 262 individuals in 2 Chinese population-based prospective cohorts. A genetic risk score was calculated based on 22 established variants for blood pressure in East Asian. We found the genetic risk score was significantly and independently associated with linear increases in blood pressure and risk of incident hypertension and cardiovascular disease (P range from 4.57×10(-3) to 3.10×10(-6)). In analyses adjusted for traditional risk factors including blood pressure, individuals carrying most blood pressure-related risk alleles (top quintile of genetic score distribution) had 40% (95% confidence interval, 18-66) and 26% (6-45) increased risk for incident hypertension and cardiovascular disease, respectively, when compared with individuals in the bottom quintile. The genetic risk score also significantly improved discrimination for incident hypertension and cardiovascular disease and led to modest improvements in risk reclassification for cardiovascular disease (all the P<0.05). Our data indicate that genetic predisposition to higher blood pressure is an independent risk factor for blood pressure increase and incident hypertension and cardiovascular disease and provides modest incremental information to cardiovascular disease risk prediction. The potential clinical use of this panel of blood pressure-associated polymorphisms remains to be determined. 
Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) have become important causes of mortality on a global scale. According to the report of World Health Organization (WHO), NCDs killed 38 million people (out of 56 million deaths that occurred worldwide) during 2012. Cardiovascular diseases accounted for most NCD deaths (17.5 million NCD deaths), followed by cancers (8.2 million NCD deaths), respiratory diseases (4.0 million NCD deaths) and diabetes mellitus (1.5 million NCD deaths). Globally, the leading cause of death is cardiovascular diseases; their prevalence is incessantly progressing in both developed and developing nations. Diabetic patients with insulin resistance are even at a greater risk of cardiovascular disease. Obesity, high cholesterol, hypertriglyceridemia and elevated blood pressure are mainly considered as major risk factors for diabetic patients afflicted with cardiovascular disease. The present review sheds light on the global incidence of cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus. Additionally, measures to be taken to reduce the global encumbrance of cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus are highlighted.
Riley, Callum James, and Matthew Gavin. Physiological changes to the cardiovascular system at high altitude and its effects on cardiovascular disease. High Alt Med Biol. 18:102-113, 2017.-The physiological changes to the cardiovascular system in response to the high altitude environment are well understood. More recently, we have begun to understand how these changes may affect and cause detriment to cardiovascular disease. In addition to this, the increasing availability of altitude simulation has dramatically improved our understanding of the physiology of high altitude. This has allowed further study on the effect of altitude in those with cardiovascular disease in a safe and controlled environment as well as in healthy individuals. Using a thorough PubMed search, this review aims to integrate recent advances in cardiovascular physiology at altitude with previous understanding, as well as its potential implications on cardiovascular disease. Altogether, it was found that the changes at altitude to cardiovascular physiology are profound enough to have a noteworthy effect on many forms of cardiovascular disease. While often asymptomatic, there is some risk in high altitude exposure for individuals with certain cardiovascular diseases. Although controlled research in patients with cardiovascular disease was largely lacking, meaning firm conclusions cannot be drawn, these risks should be a consideration to both the individual and their physician.
Since the introduction of Antiretroviral Therapy (ART), the life expectancy and health quality for patients infected with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) have significantly improved. Nevertheless, as a result of not only the deleterious effects of the virus itself and prolonged ART, but also the effects of aging, cardiovascular diseases have emerged as one of the most common causes of death among these patients.
The purpose of this review is to explore the new insights on the spectrum of Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) in HIV infection, with emphasis on the factors that contribute to the atherosclerotic process and its role in the development of acute coronary syndrome in the setting of infection.
A literature search using PubMed, ScienceDirect and Web of Science was performed. Articles up to Mar, 2017, were selected for inclusion. The search was conducted using MeSH terms, with the following key terms: [human immunodeficiency virus AND (cardiovascular disease OR coronary heart disease) AND (antiretroviral therapy AND (cardiovascular disease OR coronary heart disease))].
Clinical cardiovascular disease tends to appear approximately 10 years before in infected individuals, when compared to the general population. The pathogenesis behind the cardiovascular, HIV-associated complications is complex and multifactorial, involving traditional CVD risk factors, as well as factors associated with the virus itself - immune activation and chronic inflammation - and the metabolic disorders related to ART regimens.
Determining the cardiovascular risk among HIV-infected patients, as well as targeting and treating conditions that predispose to CVD, are now emerging concerns among physicians.
Hypertension alone is a poor predictor of the individual risk of cardiovascular disease. Hereditary factors of which hypertension is merely a marker may explain why some hypertensive individuals appear more susceptible to cardiovascular disease, and why some ethnicities have more often seemingly hypertension-related cardiovascular disease than others. We hypothesize that, in hypertensive individuals, a positive family history of cardiovascular disease identifies a high-risk subpopulation.
Healthy Life in Urban Settings (HELIUS) is a cohort study among participants of Dutch, South-Asian Surinamese, African Surinamese, Ghanaian, Turkish, and Moroccan origin aged 70 years and younger. In participants with hypertension (n=6467), we used logistic regression to assess the association of family history of cardiovascular disease with prevalent stroke and nonstroke cardiovascular disease, adjusting for sex, age, education, and smoking. To detect ethnic differences, we tested for interaction between family history and ethnicity and stratified the analysis by ethnicity. A positive family history was associated with a higher prevalence of nonstroke cardiovascular disease (odds ratio [OR], 2.05; 95% CI, 1.65-2.54) and stroke (OR, 1.62; 95% CI, 1.19-2.20). The strongest association of family history with nonstroke cardiovascular disease was found among the Dutch (OR, 2.47; 95% CI, 1.37-4.44) and with stroke among the African Surinamese (OR, 2.17; 95% CI, 1.32-3.57). The interaction between family history and African Surinamese origin for stroke was statistically significant.
In multiethnic populations of hypertensive patients, a positive family history of cardiovascular disease may be used clinically to identify individuals at high risk for nonstroke cardiovascular disease regardless of ethnic origin and African Surinamese individuals at high risk for stroke.
The European guidelines on cardiovascular disease (CVD) prevention advise use of relative risk and risk age algorithms for estimating CVD risk in patients with low estimated absolute risk. Patients with inflammatory joint diseases (IJD) are associated with increased risk of CVD. We aimed to estimate relative risk and risk age across IJD entities and evaluate the agreement between 'cardiovascular risk age' and 'vascular age models'.
Using cross-sectional data from a nationwide project on CVD risk assessment in IJD, risk age estimations were performed in patients with low/moderate absolute risk of fatal CVD. Risk age was calculated according to the cardiovascular risk age and vascular age model, and risk age estimations were compared using regression analysis and calculating percentage of risk age estimations differing ≥5years.
Relative risk was increased in 53% and 20% had three times or higher risk compared to individuals with optimal CVD risk factor levels. Furthermore, 20-42% had a risk age ≥5years higher than their actual age, according to the specific risk age model. There were only minor differences between IJD entities regarding relative risk and risk age. Discrepancies ≥5years in estimated risk age were observed in 14-43% of patients. The largest observed difference in calculated risk age was 24years.
In patients with low estimated absolute risk, estimation of relative CVD risk and risk age may identify additional patients at need of intensive CVD preventive efforts. However, there is a substantial discrepancy between the risk age models.
To explore the effects of a Traditional Chinese Medicine health educational intervention on the quality of life and self-care agency of elderly patients living with chronic cardiovascular disease.
Cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. The secondary prevention and treatment for chronic cardiovascular disease emphasize the importance of lifestyle modification. However, behavior-changing is difficult and individual choices are influenced by broader environmental factors. The lifestyle intervention for the purpose of self-care enhancing should be considered the driving force from the cultural element.
The study was conducted from April 2014 to October 2014. Ninety-eight community dwelling individuals with chronic cardiovascular disease were recruited from Shaoxing and randomized. 48 participants were in the intervention group with a 6-month Traditional Chinese Medicine health education and 50 participants were in the control group with routine care. The main measurements included health-related quality of life and self-care agency, which was assessed by the Short Form-36 Chinese version and the Exercise of Self-Care Agency Scale respectively, and were measured at the baseline and post intervention (6months after baseline).
After 6months of intervention, the quality of life and self-care agency in the intervention group were significantly improved.
The traditional Chinese medicine health education is an effective method for promoting quality of life and self-care agency in cardiovascular disease patients. It could be applied as adjunctive care for cardiovascular disease patients self-care supporting.
To derive and validate a single metric of activity tracking that associates with lower risk of cardiovascular disease mortality.
We derived an algorithm, Personalized Activity Intelligence (PAI), using the HUNT Fitness Study (n = 4631), and validated it in the general HUNT population (n = 39,298) aged 20-74 years. The PAI was divided into three sex-specific groups (≤50, 51-99, and ≥100), and the inactive group (0 PAI) was used as the referent. Hazard ratios for all-cause and cardiovascular disease mortality were estimated using Cox proportional hazard regressions.
After >1 million person-years of observations during a mean follow-up time of 26.2 (SD 5.9) years, there were 10,062 deaths, including 3867 deaths (2207 men and 1660 women) from cardiovascular disease. Men and women with a PAI level ≥100 had 17% (95% confidence interval [CI], 7%-27%) and 23% (95% CI, 4%-38%) reduced risk of cardiovascular disease mortality, respectively, compared with the inactive groups. Obtaining ≥100 PAI was associated with significantly lower risk for cardiovascular disease mortality in all prespecified age groups, and in participants with known cardiovascular disease risk factors (all P-trends <.01). Participants who did not obtain ≥100 PAI had increased risk of dying regardless of meeting the physical activity recommendations.
PAI may have a huge potential to motivate people to become and stay physically active, as it is an easily understandable and scientifically proven metric that could inform potential users of how much physical activity is needed to reduce the risk of premature cardiovascular disease death.
The potent and now longstanding evidence of the association between placentation-related disorders and cardiovascular disease should be translated into clinical practice in order to introduce a preventive approach to future obstetric and cardiovascular diseases. The purpose of this review is to integrate cardiovascular risk/disease and obstetric complications, which are linked by endothelial dysfunction, as windows of opportunity for improving women's health. Questionnaires adaptable to local practices are proposed to incorporate cardiovascular and obstetrical indexes into two stages of a woman's lifetime.
The associations between specific types of nuts, specifically peanuts and walnuts, and cardiovascular disease remain unclear.
The authors sought to analyze the associations between the intake of total and specific types of nuts and cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, and stroke risk.
The authors included 76,364 women from the Nurses' Health Study (1980 to 2012), 92,946 women from the Nurses' Health Study II (1991 to 2013), and 41,526 men from the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study (1986 to 2012) who were free of cancer, heart disease, and stroke at baseline. Nut consumption was assessed using food frequency questionnaires at baseline and was updated every 4 years.
During 5,063,439 person-years of follow-up, the authors documented 14,136 incident cardiovascular disease cases, including 8,390 coronary heart disease cases and 5,910 stroke cases. Total nut consumption was inversely associated with total cardiovascular disease and coronary heart disease after adjustment for cardiovascular risk factors. The pooled multivariable hazard ratios for cardiovascular disease and coronary heart disease among participants who consumed 1 serving of nuts (28 g) 5 or more times per week, compared with the reference category (never or almost never), were 0.86 (95% confidence interval: 0.79 to 0.93; p for trend = 0.0002) and 0.80 (95% confidence interval: 0.72 to 0.89; p for trend <0.001), respectively. Consumption of peanuts and tree nuts (2 or more times/week) and walnuts (1 or more times/week) was associated with a 13% to 19% lower risk of total cardiovascular disease and 15% to 23% lower risk of coronary heart disease.
In 3 large prospective cohort studies, higher consumption of total and specific types of nuts was inversely associated with total cardiovascular disease and coronary heart disease.
To investigate the knowledge and clinical practices of cardiovascular disease prevention among registered nurses who worked on three major clinical units in Beijing hospitals.
Health education on cardiovascular disease prevention is an important component of nursing practice; however, Chinese registered nurses' knowledge and practice patterns have been poorly explored in previous studies.
A cross-sectional study.
A stratified random sample of three hundred registered nurses was recruited from two tertiary hospitals in Beijing, China. A validated questionnaire was used to examine nurses' knowledge of cardiovascular disease risk factors, their practices and perceived barriers to cardiovascular disease prevention-related patient education. The differences in knowledge of cardiovascular disease risk factors and the practice pattern associated with cardiovascular disease prevention were compared among nurses who worked on three major clinical units.
Questionnaires were completed by 273 registered nurses with a response rate of 91%. More than 75% of the registered nurses knew the cardiovascular disease risk factors; however, less than half knew the right target goals for cardiovascular disease risk factors. Notably, fewer than 70% of registered nurses routinely provided health education for cardiovascular disease prevention during their practice. There was inconsistency between registered nurses' knowledge of target goals for cardiovascular disease risk reduction and their education practices on cardiovascular disease prevention. The three major barriers to providing cardiovascular disease risk factor preventive education were lack of time, patients' reluctance to change lifestyle and lack of physicians' support.
Not all of the registered nurses were motivated to educate and encourage patients to engage healthy lifestyle changes, even though most of them were knowledgeable about cardiovascular disease risk factors. A gap between the knowledge and practice for the prevention of cardiovascular disease was identified.
The findings highlight the need to advocate for knowledge application and address knowledge deficits in the area of cardiovascular disease prevention among registered nurses.
There is increasing recognition of association of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) with cardiovascular disease (CVD). Metabolic syndrome is common in both NAFLD and cardiovascular diseases. Our study is designed to investigate the association of NAFLD with cardiovascular disease.
It's a cross-sectional study which included 104 patients of coronary artery disease and hypertensive heart disease. Those patients having secondary causes of steatosis were excluded. Complete cardiovascular evaluation which included assessment of metabolic syndrome, routine biochemistries, viral markers, Ultrasonography (USG) abdomen, hs-CRP and TNF-α levels were obtained for all patients.
Of all patients with cardiovascular disease, 19.2% (20/104) had essential hypertension with hypertensive heart disease the remaining 80.8% (84/104) patients had ischemic heart disease (IHD). On USG 69.2% (72/104) had NAFLD, these 50% (36/72) had grade 1 NAFLD and the rest grade 2 NAFLD. The hs-CRP levels and TNF-α were significantly higher in patients with NAFLD (p-value <0.001) and within patients with NAFLD the levels were higher in patients with grade 2 NAFLD. Also, binary logistic regression showed that high body-mass index (BMI), raised serum triglyceride levels, increased waist circumference and hypertension were significantly associated with the presence of NAFLD.
Our data indicates that NALD is highly prevalent in patients of cardiovascular disease (69.2%) and is significantly associated with metabolic syndrome and its individual components. The levels of hs-CRP and TNF-α were significantly higher in patients with NAFLD and showed an increasing trend with the severity of fatty liver.
The risk of cardiovascular disease in women with gestational diabetes is poorly understood. We sought to determine whether gestational diabetes increases the risk of cardiovascular disease more than two decades after pregnancy.
We carried out a retrospective cohort study of 1,070,667 women who delivered infants in hospitals within Quebec, Canada, between 1989 and 2013. We followed 67,356 women with gestational diabetes and 1,003,311 without gestational diabetes for a maximum of 25.2 years after the index delivery. The main outcome measures were hospitalization for ischemic heart disease, myocardial infarction, coronary angioplasty, coronary artery bypass graft, and other cardiovascular disorders. We used Cox regression to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) comparing women with gestational diabetes to no gestational diabetes, adjusted for age, parity, socioeconomic deprivation, time period, and preeclampsia.
Women with gestational diabetes had a higher cumulative incidence of hospitalization for cardiovascular disease 25 years after delivery (190.8 per 1000 women) compared with no gestational diabetes (117.8 per 1000 women). Gestational diabetes was associated with a higher risk of ischemic heart disease (HR 1.23, 95% CI 1.12-1.36), myocardial infarction (HR 2.14, 95% CI 1.15-2.47), coronary angioplasty (HR 2.23, 95% CI 1.87-2.65), and coronary artery bypass graft (HR 3.16, 95% CI 2.24-4.47).
In this population of pregnant women, gestational diabetes was associated with an increased risk of heart disease 25 years after delivery. Women with gestational diabetes may merit closer monitoring for cardiovascular disease prevention after pregnancy.
The number of elderly patients with end-stage kidney disease is on the rise. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is characterized by parenchymal fat accumulation in patients without information about alcohol abuse. The aim of our study was to determine correlation between NAFLD and cardiovascular diseases in elderly hemodialysis patients.
The examination was organized as observational and cross-sectional study in elderly patients on hemodialysis. An abdominal ultrasound examination was made in order to define NAFLD. Intima-media thickness of the carotid arteries was quantified by Doppler ultrasound. Biochemical parameters, gender, anthropometric characteristics, duration, adequacy of hemodialysis, blood pressure, smoking and cardiovascular disease were determined. Respondents were divided into a group with NAFLD (37/72 patients, 51 %) and group without NAFLD (35/72 patients, 49 %).
Patients with NAFLD have significantly more cardiovascular disease (p = 0.017) as well as significantly higher values of intima-media thickness of the carotid arteries (p = 0.03) in correlation with patients without NAFLD. Patients without NAFLD have a statistically lower triglyceride (p = 0.04), aspartate aminotransferase (p = 0.006), alanine aminotransferase (p = 0.013) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (p = 0.029) compared to patients with NAFLD. Patients with cardiovascular disease have a higher risk of NAFLD; likewise, patients with NAFLD have a three times higher chance for developing cardiovascular diseases (OR 3.01).
Elderly patients on hemodialysis with cardiovascular disease have a higher risk of NAFLD; likewise, patients with NAFLD have a three times higher chance for developing cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death worldwide. While cardiovascular disease typically does not occur until adulthood, the pathogenesis of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease starts in early childhood.
The purpose of this review is to describe the evidence that the process of atherosclerosis begins in childhood, as well as identify the risk factors present in childhood that are associated with the presence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in childhood as well as future cardiovascular events in adulthood.
There is much accumulating evidence linking modifiable risk factors that are already present in childhood and that strongly predict future cardiovascular disease. The selective targeting of modifiable risk factors in childhood, including body mass index, holds promise in reducing the burden of adult cardiovascular disease. Future research studies should focus on elucidating the mechanisms which drive the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in childhood and young adulthood, as well as identifying which interventions are most effective at limiting the progression of atherosclerosis and thus reducing future cardiovascular disease.
Patients with primary elevations of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) ≥190 mg/dL are at a higher risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease as a result of long-term exposure to markedly elevated LDL-C levels. Therefore, initiation of statin therapy is recommended for these individuals. However, there is a lack of randomized trial evidence supporting these recommendations in primary prevention. In the present analysis, we provide hitherto unpublished data on the cardiovascular effects of LDL-C lowering among a primary prevention population with LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL.
We aimed to assess the benefits of LDL-C lowering on cardiovascular outcomes among individuals with primary elevations of LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL without preexisting vascular disease at baseline. We performed post hoc analyses from the WOSCOPS (West of Scotland Coronary Prevention Study) randomized, placebo-controlled trial, and observational posttrial long-term follow-up, after excluding individuals with evidence of vascular disease at baseline. WOSCOPS enrolled 6595 men aged 45 to 64 years, who were randomly assigned to pravastatin 40 mg/d or placebo. In the present analyses, 5529 participants without evidence of vascular disease were included, stratified by LDL-C levels into those with LDL-C <190 mg/dL (n=2969; mean LDL-C 178±6 mg/dL) and those with LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL (n=2560; mean LDL-C 206±12 mg/dL). The effect of pravastatin versus placebo on coronary heart disease and major adverse cardiovascular events were assessed over the 4.9-year randomized controlled trial phase and on mortality outcomes over a total of 20 years of follow-up.
Among 5529 individuals without vascular disease, pravastatin reduced the risk of coronary heart disease by 27% (<i>P</i>=0.002) and major adverse cardiovascular events by 25% (<i>P</i>=0.004) consistently among those with and without LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL (<i>P</i>-interaction >0.9). Among individuals with LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL, pravastatin reduced the risk of coronary heart disease by 27% (<i>P</i>=0.033) and major adverse cardiovascular events by 25% (<i>P</i>=0.037) during the initial trial phase and the risk of coronary heart disease death, cardiovascular death, and all-cause mortality by 28% (<i>P</i>=0.020), 25% (<i>P</i>=0.009), and 18% (<i>P</i>=0.004), respectively, over a total of 20 years of follow-up.
The present analyses provide robust novel evidence for the short- and long-term benefits of lowering LDL-C for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease among individuals with primary elevations of LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL.
Cardiovascular disease risk markers have become more prevalent in childhood. To provide increased understanding of the etiology of this public health issue, we investigated associations between family characteristics with cardiovascular disease risk markers in adolescents from a developing nation.
In this cross-sectional study data for fasting glucose, lipoproteins (LDL-C and HDL-C), triglycerides, and total cholesterol were collected from 991 adolescents aged 10-17 who were recruited from public schools in Londrina city, Southern Brazil. Family history of cardiovascular disease and parental engagement in risk behavior (alcohol consumption and tobacco smoking) were collected using a self-reported parental questionnaire. Socioeconomic status, adolescent physical activity (estimated by Baecke questionnaire), self-reported tobacco and alcohol intake, and somatic maturation (age at peak height velocity) were used as covariates. Logistic regression was used for the main analyses.
Independent of adolescent lifestyle behaviors, associations (OR<sub>adj</sub> [95% CI]) were found between: (1) paternal family history of cardiovascular disease with increased likelihood of high adolescent offspring BMI (1.53 [1.01 to 2.32]) and high triglycerides (2.93 [1.04 to 8.27]); (2) maternal family history of cardiovascular disease with heightened odds of high adolescent offspring triglycerides (2.84 [1.02 to 7.91]); (3) maternal cardiovascular disease with higher odds of high fasting glucose (2.16 [1.13 to 4.14]), and (4) maternal smoking with increased odds of high LDL-C (1.78 [1.14 to 2.79]) and high total cholesterol (1.77 [1.01 to 3.10]) in adolescent offspring.
Family history of cardiovascular disease and maternal tobacco smoking are related to increased cardiovascular risk in adolescents, potentially independent of their own lifestyle behaviors.
Cardiovascular disease is increasingly recognized as a major cause of premature mortality among those with autoimmune disorders. There is an urgent need to identify those patients with autoimmune disease who are at risk for CVD so as to optimize therapeutic intervention and ultimately prevention. Accurate identification, monitoring and stratification of such patients will depend upon a panel of biomarkers of cardiovascular disease. This review will discuss some of the most recent biomarkers of cardiovascular diseases in autoimmune disease, including lipid oxidation, imaging biomarkers to characterize coronary calcium, plaque, and intima media thickness, biomarkers of inflammation and activated complement, genetic markers, endothelial biomarkers, and antiphospholipid antibodies. Clinical implementation of these biomarkers will not only enhance patient care but also likely accelerate the pharmaceutical pipeline for targeted intervention to reduce or eliminate cardiovascular disease in the setting of autoimmunity. 
To assess the relationships of diabetes and albuminuria with all-cause mortality and cardiovascular disease outcomes in a population without prior cardiovascular disease using data from the Darwin Region Urban Indigenous Diabetes (DRUID) study.
We conducted a prospective cohort study of 706 participants (aged 15-81 years, 68% women) without prior cardiovascular disease who underwent a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test. Deaths and fatal or non-fatal cardiovascular disease were determined over 7 years, and hazard ratios with 95% CIs and population attributable risks were estimated for baseline glycaemia and albuminuria.
Compared with normoglycaemia and after adjustment for age, sex, hypertension, dyslipidaemia and smoking, known diabetes was associated with an adjusted hazard ratio of 4.8 (95% CI 1.5-14.7) for all-cause mortality and 5.6 (95% CI 2.1-15.2) for cardiovascular disease. Compared with normoalbuminuria, the respective adjusted risks for macroalbuminuria were 10.9 (95% CI 3.7-32.1) and 3.9 (95% CI 1.4-10.8). The Adjusted all-cause mortality and cardiovascular disease estimated population attributable risks for diabetes were 27% and 32%, and for albuminuria they were 32% and 21%, respectively.
In our study population, the burden of mortality and cardiovascular disease was largely driven by diabetes and albuminuria. This finding on the influence of diabetes and albuminuria is consistent with reports in other high-risk Indigenous populations and should be better reflected in risk scores and intervention programmes.
Traditional Chinese exercise (TCE) has widespread use for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease; however, there appears to be no consensus about the benefits of TCE for patients with cardiovascular disease. The objective of this systematic review was to determine the effects of TCE for patients with cardiovascular disease.
Relevant studies were searched by PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, the Cochrane Library, the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, and the China National Knowledge Infrastructure. We covered only published articles with randomized controlled trials. The outcome measures included physiological outcomes, biochemical outcomes, physical function, quality of life, and depression. A total of 35 articles with 2249 cardiovascular disease patients satisfied the inclusion criteria. The pooling revealed that TCE could decrease systolic blood pressure by 9.12 mm Hg (95% CI -16.38 to -1.86, P=0.01) and diastolic blood pressure by 5.12 mm Hg (95% CI -7.71 to -2.52, P<0.001). Patients performing TCE also found benefits compared with those in the control group in terms of triglyceride (standardized mean difference -0.33, 95% CI -0.56 to -0.09, P=0.006), 6-minute walk test (mean difference 59.58 m, 95% CI -153.13 to 269.93, P=0.03), Minnesota Living With Heart Failure Questionnaire results (mean difference -17.08, 95% CI -23.74 to -10.41, P<0.001), 36-Item Short Form physical function scale (mean difference 0.82, 95% CI 0.32-1.33, P=0.001), and Profile of Mood States depression scale (mean difference -3.02, 95% CI -3.50 to -2.53, P<0.001).
This study demonstrated that TCE can effectively improve physiological outcomes, biochemical outcomes, physical function, quality of life, and depression among patients with cardiovascular disease. More high-quality randomized controlled trials on this topic are warranted.
Cells ensure their protein quality control through the proteostasis network. Aging and age-related diseases, such as neurodegenerative and cardiovascular diseases, have been associated to the reduction of proteostasis network efficiency and, consequently, to the accumulation of protein misfolded aggregates. The decline in protein homeostasis has been associated with the development and progression of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, cardiac hypertrophy, cardiomyopathies, and heart failure. Exercise training is a key component of the management of patients with cardiovascular disease, consistently improving quality of life and prognosis. In this review, we give an overview on age-related protein aggregation, the role of the increase of misfolded protein aggregates on cardiovascular pathophysiology, and describe the beneficial or deleterious effects of the proteostasis network on the development of cardiovascular disease. We subsequently discuss how exercise training, a key lifestyle intervention in those with cardiovascular disease, could restore proteostasis and improve disease status.
Background Previous studies demonstrated that lower outdoor temperatures increase the levels of established cardiovascular disease risk factors, such as blood pressure and lipids. Whether or not low temperatures increase novel cardiovascular disease risk factors levels is not well studied. The aim was to investigate associations of outdoor temperature with a comprehensive range of established and novel cardiovascular disease risk factors in two large Northern European studies of older adults, in whom cardiovascular disease risk is increased. Design and methods Data came from the British Regional Heart Study (4252 men aged 60-79 years) and the Prospective Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk (5804 men and women aged 70-82 years). Associations between outdoor temperature and cardiovascular disease risk factors were quantified in each study and then pooled using a random effects model. Results With a 5℃ lower mean temperature, total cholesterol was 0.04 mmol/l (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.02-0.07) higher, low density lipoprotein cholesterol was 0.02 mmol/l (95% CI 0.01-0.05) higher and SBP was 1.12 mm Hg (95% CI 0.60-1.64) higher. Among novel cardiovascular disease risk factors, C-reactive protein was 3.3% (95% CI 1.0-5.6%) higher, interleukin-6 was 2.7% (95% CI 1.1-4.3%) higher, and vitamin D was 11.2% (95% CI 1.0-20.4%) lower. Conclusions Lower outdoor temperature was associated with adverse effects on cholesterol, blood pressure, circulating inflammatory markers, and vitamin D in two older populations. Public health approaches to protect the elderly against low temperatures could help in reducing the levels of several cardiovascular disease risk factors.
Cardiovascular diseases are the number one cause of death globally with an estimated 7.4 million people dying from coronary heart disease. Studies have been conducted to identify the therapeutic utility of exosomes in many diseases, including cardiovascular diseases. It has been demonstrated that exosomes are immune modulators, can be used to treat cardiac ischemic injury, pulmonary hypertension and many other diseases, including cancers. Exosomes can be used as a biomarker for disease and cell-free drug delivery system for targeting the cells. Many studies suggest that exosomes can be used as a cell-free vaccine for many diseases. In this chapter, we explore the possibility of future therapeutic potential of exosomes in various cardiovascular diseases.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine disorder in reproductive aged women and is characterized by two of the following three features: oligoovulation or anovulation, clinical and/or biochemical signs of hyperandrogenism, or polycystic ovaries.
It has been demonstrated that PCOS includes a complex number of systemic symptoms in addition to symptoms related to the reproductive apparatus. It has been associated with obesity, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes and an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Several clinical and basic studies have investigated the link between PCOS and the cardiovascular disease risk, which seems to be due to blunted lipid/glucose metabolism, hypertension, and systemic inflammatory and coagulation disorders. Therefore, the current manuscript aims to review the main findings on PCOS and obesity/obesity-related disease (glucose derangements and cardiovascular disease risk factors).
Although there are no long-term data on the morbidity and mortality for cardiovascular disease in PCOS, it is advisable to perform a careful metabolic and cardiovascular assessment in women with PCOS in order to tailor the most suitable strategy to prevent cardiovascular disease.
This study aimed to examine the association between recurrent pregnancy loss and the risk of cardiovascular disease mortality.
We identified 54,652 women who were pregnant during the Japan Collaborative Cohort Study. These women were 40-79 years at the date of cohort entry between 1988 and 1990. Participants received municipal health screening examinations and completed self-administered questionnaires. The cause of death was confirmed by annual or biannual follow-up surveys for a median of 18 years. The exposure was the number of pregnancy loss. The outcome was mortality from total cardiovascular disease and its subtypes according to the International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision. Adjustment variables included age, number of deliveries, education, body mass index, physical activity, smoking status, and drinking status. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were used to estimate the cumulative mortality.
The number of pregnancy loss tended to be inversely associated with the risk of mortality from total stroke, intracerebral hemorrhage, and total cardiovascular disease. The multivariable hazard ratio of total cardiovascular disease for ≥2 pregnancy losses versus no pregnancy loss was .84 (95% confidence interval, .74-0.95). A 2-fold excess risk of mortality from ischemic stroke associated with ≥2 pregnancy losses was observed in women aged 40-59 years, with a multivariable hazard ratio of 2.19 (95% confidence interval, 1.06-4.49), but not in older women.
Recurrentpregnancy loss tends to be associated with a lower risk of mortality from cardiovascular disease at 40-79 years. Younger women have an excess risk of ischemic stroke mortality associated with recurrent pregnancy loss.
Substantial evidence suggests that consuming 1-2 servings of fish per week, particularly oily fish (e.g., salmon, herring, sardines) is beneficial for cardiovascular health due to its high n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid content. However, there is some concern that the mercury content in fish may increase cardiovascular disease risk, but this relationship remains unclear.
The PREDIMED trial included 7477 participants who were at high risk for cardiovascular disease at baseline. In this study, we evaluated associations between mercury exposure, fish consumption and cardiovascular disease. We randomly selected 147 of the 288 cases diagnosed with cardiovascular disease during follow-up and matched them on age and sex to 267 controls. Instrumental neutron activation analysis was used to assess toenail mercury concentration. In-person interviews, medical record reviews and validated questionnaires were used to assess fish consumption and other covariates. Information was collected at baseline and updated yearly during follow-up. We used conditional logistic regression to evaluate associations in the total nested case-control study, and unconditional logistic regression for population subsets.
Mean (±SD) toenail mercury concentrations (μg per gram) did not significantly differ between cases (0.63 (±0.53)) and controls (0.67 (±0.49)). Mercury concentration was not associated with cardiovascular disease in any analysis, and neither was fish consumption or n-3 fatty acids. The fully-adjusted relative risks for the highest versus lowest quartile of mercury concentration were 0.71 (95% Confidence Interval [CI], 0.34, 1.14; p<sub>trend</sub> = 0.37) for the nested case-control study, 0.74 (95% CI, 0.32, 1.76; p<sub>trend</sub> = 0.43) within the Mediterranean diet intervention group, and 0.50 (95% CI, 0.13, 1.96; p<sub>trend</sub> = 0.41) within the control arm of the trial. Associations remained null when mercury was jointly assessed with fish consumption at baseline and during follow-up. Results were similar in different sensitivity analyses.
We found no evidence that mercury exposure from regular fish consumption increases cardiovascular disease risk in a population of Spanish adults with high cardiovascular disease risk and high fish consumption. This implies that the mercury content in fish does not detract from the already established cardiovascular benefits of fish consumption.
ISRCTN35739639 .
Kidney disease progression, assessed by change in eGFR on the basis of creatinine, is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease and death. This study aimed to evaluate whether changes in multiple filtration markers, individually and combined, were associated with cardiovascular disease and death.
Creatinine, cystatin C, and β2-microglobulin were measured among 9716 Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study participants in 1990-1992 and 1996-1998. Percentage change in three filtration markers (eGFR on the basis of creatinine, eGFR on the basis of cystatin C, and 1/β2-microglobulin) individually and the average of percentage change across all three filtration markers were calculated. Cardiovascular events and deaths were ascertained from 1996 to 2011. Cox regression models were adjusted for established risk factors for cardiovascular disease and mortality and first measurement of eGFR on the basis of creatinine.
During a median follow-up of 14 years, there were 1922 cardiovascular events and 2285 deaths from any cause. Decline of >30% in each filtration marker was significantly associated with higher risk of mortality compared with stable kidney function (-9.9% to +9.9% change in the filtration marker) with hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals) of 1.91 (1.67 to 2.18) for eGFR on the basis of creatinine, 2.29 (1.99 to 2.63) for eGFR on the basis of cystatin C, and 2.48 (2.15 to 2.86) for 1/β2-microglobulin, with similar associations for cardiovascular disease. An average decline of >30% across the three markers was strongly associated with higher risk of all-cause mortality (hazard ratio, 2.82; 95% confidence interval, 2.42 to 3.29).
Kidney disease progression was assessed using >30% decline in eGFR on the basis of creatinine, eGFR on the basis of cystatin C, and 1/β2-microglobulin and average decline of >30% across the three filtration markers is strongly associated with risk of cardiovascular disease and death.
Background The relationships between dietary intake of soy foods and risk of cardiovascular disease are uncertain. The aims of this study were to evaluate and summarize the evidence on the association between consumption of soy and risk of cardiovascular disease (including stroke and coronary heart disease). Methods We systematically searched the MEDLINE and EMBASE databases from their inception up to 22 February 2016. We included only observational studies, and used random-effects models to calculate summary relative risks (SRRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Results A total of 10 prospective cohort and seven case-control studies met the inclusion criteria. There were a total of 17,269 cardiovascular disease events, including 6265 stroke events, 10,806 coronary heart disease events, and 198 other cardiovascular disease events. A significant negative association was shown between soy intake and risk of cardiovascular disease (SRR = 0.84 95% CI: 0.75-0.94; p<sub>heterogeneity</sub><0.001, I<sup>2 </sup>= 71.4%). Subgroup meta-analyses indicated that a statistically significant protective effect was primarily observed in case-control studies and in Asian populations. There was a borderline significant association between intake of tofu and the risk of cardiovascular disease (SRR = 0.80, 95% CI: 0.64-1.00). A significant negative association was shown for the association between soy intake and risk of stroke (SRR = 0.82, 95% CI: 0.68-0.99) and coronary heart disease (SRR = 0.83, 95% CI: 0.72-0.95). There were no associations between soy isoflavones consumption and risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Conclusion Overall evidence indicated that consumption of soy was negatively associated with the risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke, and coronary heart disease risk.
To estimate the potential health benefit of screening strategies for cardiovascular diseases primary prevention in a rural northern Chinese population.
A total of 6 221 adults aged 40-74 years old, from rural Beijing, China and free from cardiovascular diseases at baseline were included. The following screening strategies were compared: Strategy 1, the strategy based on numbers of risk factors recommended by the Chinese Guideline for Prevention of Cardiovascular Diseases in people aged 40-74; Strategy 2, screening people aged 40-74 based on the Prediction for Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk in China (China-PAR) risk prediction model; Strategy 3, screening people aged 50-74 using the China-PAR risk prediction model. Participates who were classified into medium- or high-risk by the corresponding strategies would be introduced to lifestyle intervention, while high risk population would take medication in addition. Markov model was used to compare the potential health benefits within 10 years in each scenario, which applied the parameters from this rural northern Chinese cohort, published literatures, meta-analyses and systematic reviews, clinical trials and other cohort studies of Chinese population. Quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained, cardiovascular diseases (CVD) events/deaths could be prevented and number needed to be screened (NNS) per QALY gained/per CVD event prevented/per CVD death prevented were calculated to compare the effectiveness. One-way sensitivity analysis concerning uncertainty of cardiovascular disease incidence rate and probabilistic sensitivity analysis about the uncertainty of hazard ratios were conducted.
Compared with non-screening strategy, the potential health benefits of each strategy were: Strategy 1 would gain QALY of 498 (95%CI: 103-894) and prevent 298 (95%CI: 155-441) CVD events; Strategy 2 would gain QALY of 691 (95%CI: 233-1 149) and prevent CVD events of 374 (95%CI: 181-567); Strategy 3 would gain QALY of 654 (95%CI: 199-1 108) and prevent CVD events of 346 (95%CI: 154-538). Screening strategy based on ChinaPAR risk prediction model (strategy 2 or 3) would be generally better in terms of QALY gained, CVD events/deaths prevented and NNS than the strategy based on numbers of CVD risk factors (all P<0.05 except NNS per QALY gained and NNS per CVD event prevented in 40-74 years). Similar benefits were obtained for the strategy 2 and 3. The results were consistent in the sensitivity analyses on the parameters of incidence rates and hazard ratios.
Screening people to target increased risks of cardiovascular diseases in this rural northern Chinese population is necessary. Screening strategy based on China-PAR risk prediction model could gain more health benefits than that based on numbers of CVD risk factors.
Educational inequality in diseases in the circulatory system (here termed cardiovascular disease) is well documented but may be confounded by early life factors. The aim of this observational study was to examine whether the associations between education and all cardiovascular diseases, ischaemic heart disease and stroke, respectively, were explained by family factors shared by siblings.
The study population included all individuals born in Denmark between 1950 and 1979 who had at least one full sibling born in the same period. Using Cox regression, data were analysed in conventional cohort and within-sibship analyses in which the association was examined within siblings discordant on education. Assuming that attenuation of associations in the within-sibship as compared with the cohort analyses would indicate confounding from factors shared within families.
A lower educational status was associated with a higher risk of cardiovascular disease, ischaemic heart disease and stroke. All associations attenuated in the within-sibship analyses, in particular in the analyses on ischaemic heart disease before age 45 years. For instance, in the cohort analyses, the hazard rate of ischaemic heart disease among women less than 45 years who had a primary school education was 94% (hazard ratio 1.94 (1.78-2.12) higher than among those with a vocational education, while it attenuated to 51% (hazard ratio 1.51 (1.34-1.71)) in the within-sibship analysis.
Confounding from factors shared by siblings explained the associations between education and the cardiovascular disease outcomes but to varying degrees. This should be taken into account when planning interventions aimed at reducing educational inequalities in the development of cardiovascular disease, ischaemic heart disease and stroke.
To investigate the risk of postoperative complications in elderly colorectal cancer patients over 65 years with comorbid cardiovascular diseases.
A total of 381 elderly colorectal cancer patients over 65 years were pathologically diagnosed as colorectal adenocarcinoma and underwent the first surgery in Beijing Hospital during January 2013 and December 2014. Patients were divided into comorbid cardiovascular disease group (258 cases) and non-cardiovascular disease group (123 cases) according to the existence of comorbid cardiovascular disease. The morbidity of postoperative complication was compared between two groups.
There was no significant difference in the morbidity of postoperative complication between two groups [27.9%(72/258) vs. 29.3%(36/123), P>0.05]. According to the Clavien-Dindo classification of postoperative complications, the morbidities of complication at all levels between two groups were not significantly different(all P>0.05). But in terms of cardiovascular complications, the morbidity of comorbid cardiovascular disease group was significantly higher than that of non-cardiovascular disease group [7.4%(19/258) vs. 0.8%(1/123), χ<sup>2</sup>=6.678, P=0.010], while no significant differences in pulmonary and abdominal complications were found between two groups(all P>0.05). The morbidities of other complications (deep vein thrombosis, urinary tract infection and renal complications, etc.) of comorbid cardiovascular disease group were lower than those in non-cardiovascular disease group [2.7%(7/258) vs. 8.1%(10/123), χ<sup>2</sup>=5.733, P=0.017]. Different types of cardiovascular diseases, different levels of cardiac risk index and American Society of Anesthesiologists(ASA) rating were not significantly related to the patient's occurrence of postoperative complications(all P>0.05).
Surgery treatment for elderly colorectal cancer patients over 65 years with comorbid cardiovascular diseases is safe. However, strict cardiovascular monitoring should be performed and necessary measures should be carried out in time.
Plasma levels of the fibrinogen degradation product D-dimer are higher among African Americans (AAs) compared with those of European ancestry and higher among women compared with men. Among AAs, little is known of the genetic architecture of D-dimer or the relationship of D-dimer to incident cardiovascular disease.
We measured baseline D-dimer in 4163 AAs aged 21 to 93 years from the prospective JHS (Jackson Heart Study) cohort and assessed association with incident cardiovascular disease events. In participants with whole genome sequencing data (n=2980), we evaluated common and rare genetic variants for association with D-dimer. Each standard deviation higher baseline D-dimer was associated with a 20% to 30% increased hazard for incident coronary heart disease, stroke, and all-cause mortality. Genetic variation near <i>F3</i> was associated with higher D-dimer (rs2022030, β=0.284, <i>P</i>=3.24×10<sup>-11</sup>). The rs2022030 effect size was nearly 3× larger among women (β=0.373, <i>P</i>=9.06×10<sup>-13</sup>) than among men (β=0.135, <i>P</i>=0.06; <i>P</i> interaction =0.009). The sex by rs2022030 interaction was replicated in an independent sample of 10 808 multiethnic men and women (<i>P</i> interaction =0.001). Finally, the African ancestral sickle cell variant (<i>HBB</i> rs334) was significantly associated with higher D-dimer in JHS (β=0.507, <i>P</i>=1.41×10<sup>-14</sup>), and this association was successfully replicated in 1933 AAs (<i>P</i>=2.3×10<sup>-5</sup>).
These results highlight D-dimer as an important predictor of cardiovascular disease risk in AAs and suggest that sex-specific and African ancestral genetic effects of the <i>F3</i> and <i>HBB</i> loci contribute to the higher levels of D-dimer among women and AAs.
<b>Objective:</b> To explore the effect of fine particulate matters with an aerodynamic diameter less than 2.5 μm (PM(2.5)) on daily cardiovascular disease mortality in seven cities of China. <b>Methods:</b> Daily average concentrations of PM(2.5), cardiovascular disease mortality data and environmental data were collected from January 1, 2013 to December 31, 2015 in seven cities of China, including Shijiazhuang, Haerbin, Shanghai, Wuhan, Guangzhou, Chengdu and Xi' an. We linked generalized additive model with Quasi-Poisson distribution to evaluate the association between daily concentrations of PM(2.5) and cardiovascular disease mortality at single-city level and multi-city level, after adjusting for the long-term and seasonal trend, as well as meteorological factors and the effect of " days of week" . <b>Results:</b> The single-pollutant model indicated that there were marked differences in association strength in these cities, among which the effect in Guangzhou was strongest. At multi-city level, a 10 μg/m(3) increase of PM(2.5) was associated with an increase of 0.315% (95<i>%CI</i>: 0.133%-0.497%) of daily cardiovascular disease mortality. From lag0 to lag2, the effect of PM(2.5) on cardiovascular disease mortality decreased, while it was strongest on lag01. In the two-pollutant model, the estimated effect decreased in all the cities with the adjustments of SO(2) or NO(2). The insignificant combined results suggested that PM(2.5) might have combined effect with other pollutants. Each 10 μg/m(3) increase of PM(2.5) was associated with increases of 0.371% (95<i>%CI</i>: 0.141%-0.600%) and 0.199% (95<i>% CI</i>: 0.077%-0.321%) of cardiovascular disease mortality in males and females, respectively. The effect of PM(2.5) on cardiovascular disease mortality increased with age and decreased with educational level, although the differences between different subgroups were insignificant. The dose-response relationship between PM(2.5) and cardiovascular disease mortality was non-linear and non-threshold, with a steeper curve at lower concentrations. <b>Conclusion:</b> The increases of PM(2.5) concentration can result in the increase of daily cardiovascular mortality.
The aim of the present study was to estimate the impact of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) on the prognosis of patients with cardiovascular disease by performing a systematic review and meta-analysis.
The Embase, PubMed, Web of Science, CNKI, and WanFang databases were searched up to September 5, 2016, to identify eligible studies. The quality of each study was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. The association between DHEAS, either on admission or at discharge, and cardiovascular disease outcomes were reviewed. The overall risk ratio for the effect of DHEAS on all-cause mortality and fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events was pooled using a fixed-effects or a random-effects model. The publication bias was evaluated using funnel plots. Twenty-five studies were included for systematic review. The follow-up duration ranged from 1 to 19 years. Eighteen studies were included in the meta-analysis. We found that lower DHEAS levels indicated a significant increased risk for all-cause mortality (risk ratio, 1.47; 95% CI, 1.38-1.56 [<i>P</i><0.00001]), fatal cardiovascular event (risk ratio, 1.58; 95% CI, 1.30-1.91 [<i>P</i><0.00001]), and nonfatal cardiovascular event (risk ratio, 1.42; 95% CI, 1.24-1.62 [<i>P</i><0.0001]) in patients with cardiovascular disease.
Patients with cardiovascular disease who have lower DHEAS levels may have poorer prognosis than those with higher DHEAS levels.
Hyperglycemia and inflammation play important roles in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy (DN). Brazilin might be an effective pharmacological agent against hyperglycemia and inflammation. In our present study, we explored whether brazilin mitigated pathological progression, inflammation, and extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation in a mouse model of diabetic nephropathy. Brazilin reduced aggravated biochemical indices of DN (proteinuria and the serum glucose level) and renal hypertrophy. Brazilin also improved renal morphology and inhibited macrophage infiltration, as manifested by different pathological staining methods. Brazilin reduced the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and CD68, a macrophage marker, in the kidney cortex, as revealed by both RT-PCR and western blotting experiments. Furthermore, brazilin significantly downregulated the serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Interestingly, brazilin significantly upregulated the levels of the anti-inflammatory factor IL-10, and prevented ECM accumulation. Brazilin reduced nuclear translocation of the NF-κB p65 subunit both in vitro and in vivo. Thus, brazilin might be a useful treatment for DN, through mitigating hypoglycemia, inflammation, and ECM accumulation.
Roflumilast, a selective inhibitor for PDE4, is approved by FDA as an anti-inflammation drug for treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study investigates the effects of roflumilast on cerebral inflammation in the rat SAH model. Here, we show that subcutaneous administration of roflumilast (3 mg/kg) significantly improved the neurological deficits. Measurement of evans blue extravasation and brain water content revealed a significant reduction of blood-brain barrier permeability and brain edema. Importantly, roflumilast treatment remarkably decreased levels of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α and the number of apoptotic neurons in the brain after SAH. These results indicate that roflumilast is effective in treating cerebral inflammation following SAH.
Objective Recent studies have revealed a link between toll-like receptors (TLRs), Kruppel-like factors (KLFs), and the adipose tissue inflammation associated with obesity. TLR4 is associated with chronic inflammation in obesity. KLF7 is known to play an important role in the differentiation of adipocytes, but its role in visceral adipose tissue inflammation has not yet been investigated. Thus, the objective of this study was to determine the correlation of TLR4 and KLF7 in inflammation induced by obesity. Methods A total of 32 Wistar male rat subjects were fed in the center for experimental animals of Shihezi University. The rats were divided into normal control (NC) and high-fat diet (HFD) group. Surgical instruments were used to collect rats' visceral adipose tissue samples in the 10th week after HFD feeding. Ninety-five Uygur subjects between 20 and 90 years old were enrolled in the present study. The subjects were divided into two groups: the normal control group (NC, 18.0 kg/m<sup>2</sup> ≤ BMI ≤ 23.9 kg/m<sup>2</sup>, n = 50) and the obesity group (OB, BMI ≥ 28 kg/m<sup>2</sup>, n = 45), and visceral adipose tissue was collected from the subjects. Anthropometric and clinical parameters were measured using standard procedures; biochemical indices were detected using the glucose oxidase-peroxidase method and a standardized automatic biochemistry analyzer; the plasma levels of inflammatory factors and adipocytokines were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); the mRNA and protein expression levels of key genes involved in the inflammatory signaling pathway were measured by real-time PCR and Western blot. Results In rats, compared with the NC group, the weight, Lee's index, waist circumference, visceral fat mass, and the plasma level of Glu, TG, FFA, and TNF-α were higher in the HFD group, while the plasma levels of LPT and APN were significantly lower in the HFD group in the 10th week. Furthermore, compared with the NC group, visceral adipose tissue's mRNA expression levels of TLR4, KLF7, and SRC were higher in the HFD group, and KLF7 was significantly positively correlated with LDL, TLR4, SRC, and IL-6 (P < 0.05). Meanwhile, in the Uygur population, the plasma levels of TG, LDL, and TNF-α in the OB group were significantly higher than those in the NC group (P < 0.05). Moreover, compared with the NC group, visceral adipose tissue's mRNA expression levels of TLR4, KLF7, and SRC were significantly higher in the OB group (P < 0.05), and KLF7 was significantly positively correlated with TC, TLR4, MYD88, SRC, and IL-6 (P < 0.05); the protein expression levels of TLR4 and KLF7 were significantly higher than those in the NC group (P < 0.05). Conclusion Higher expression of TLR4 and KLF7 may play a vital role in the process of inflammation induced by obesity in visceral adipose tissue.
Indirubin plays an important role in the treatment of many chronic diseases and exhibits strong anti-inflammatory activity. However, the molecular mode of action during mastitis prophylaxis remains poorly understood. In this study, a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced mastitis mouse model showed that indirubin attenuated histopathological changes in the mammary gland, local tissue necrosis, and neutrophil infiltration. Moreover, indirubin significantly downregulated the production of interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). We explored the mechanism whereby indirubin exerts protective effects against LPS-induced inflammation of mouse mammary epithelial cells (MMECs). The addition of different concentrations of indirubin before exposure of cells to LPS for 1 h significantly attenuated inflammation and reduced the concentrations of the three inflammatory cytokines in a dose-dependent manner. Indirubin downregulated LPS-induced cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) expression, inhibited phosphorylation of the LPS-induced nuclear transcription factor-kappa B (NF-kB) P65 protein and its inhibitor IkBα of the NF-kB signaling pathway. Furthermore, indirubin suppressed phosphorylation of P38, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and c-Jun NH<sub>2</sub>-terminal kinase (JNK) of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal pathways. Thus, indirubin effectively suppressed LPS-induced inflammation via TLR4 abrogation mediated by the NF-kB and MAPK signaling pathways and may be useful for mastitis prophylaxis.
In adult obesity, low-grade systemic inflammation is considered an important step in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance (IR). The association between obesity and inflammation is less well established in adolescents. Here, we ascertain the importance of inflammation in IR among obese adolescents by utilizing either random forest (RF) classification or mediation analysis approaches. The inflammation balance score, composed of eight pro- and anti-inflammatory makers, as well as most of the individual inflammatory markers differed significantly between lean and overweight/obese. In contrast, adiponectin was the only individual marker selected as a predictor of IR by RF, and the balance score only revealed a medium-to-low importance score. Neither adiponectin nor the inflammation balance score was found to mediate the relationship between obesity and IR. These findings do not support the premise that low-grade systemic inflammation is a key for the expression of IR in the human. Prospective longitudinal studies should confirm these findings. 
Patients with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) have mutated phagocyte NADPH oxidase, resulting in reduced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). While the mechanism underlying hyperinfection in CGD is well understood, the basis for inflammatory disorders that arise in the absence of evident infection has not been fully explained. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of phagocyte NADPH oxidase deficiency on lung inflammation induced by nonviable Candida albicans (nCA). Mice deficient in this enzyme (CGD mice) showed more severe neutrophilic pneumonia than nCA-treated wild-type mice, which exhibited significantly higher lung concentrations of interleukin (IL)-1β, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and keratinocyte-derived chemokine (KC). Neutralization of these proinflammatory mediators significantly reduced neutrophil infiltration. In vitro, production of IL-1β and TNF-α from neutrophils and that of KC from macrophages was enhanced in nCA-stimulated neutrophils from CGD mice. Expression of IL-1β mRNA was higher in the stimulated CGD neutrophils than in the stimulated wild-type cells, concomitant with upregulation of nuclear factor (NF)-κB and its upstream regulator extracellular-signal regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2. Pretreatment with an NADPH oxidase inhibitor significantly enhanced IL-1β production in the wild-type neutrophils stimulated with nCA. These results suggest that lack of ROS production because of NADPH oxidase deficiency results in the production of higher levels of proinflammatory mediators from neutrophils and macrophages, which may at least partly contribute to the exacerbation of nCA-induced lung inflammation in CGD mice.
Macrophage-related inflammatory response is one of the main biological factors resulting in failure of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction, although the specific pathomechanism remains to be clarified. Our aim was to investigate the association between graft loosening and macrophage-related inflammation in cases of loosening of reconstructed ACL autografts. Tissue samples were obtained from 21 patients who underwent a second-look arthroscopy within the first year after arthroscopic ACL reconstruction using single-bundle hamstring tendon autografts. Possible biological factors of graft loosening were analyzed using polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and hematoxylin/eosin and immunohistochemical staining of graft tissue samples obtained during the second-look arthroscopy. Graft loosening was closely related to increased gene and protein expression of inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8) and activation of the inflammation-related toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling (TLR2 and TLR4). The molecular expression of TGF-β and type I and III collagen was also inhibited to varying degrees, with decreased vascularization of the graft due to an inhibition of VEGF. iNOS, a marker of M1 macrophage activation, was highly expressed in cases of graft loosening, with no effect of M2 macrophages identified. The activation of M1 macrophages and aseptic inflammation signaling is an important biological factor of graft loosening after ACL reconstruction, affecting ligamentization and the health of grafts.
Transforming growth factor β-activated kinase-1 (TAK1) is a key upstream kinase in cell signaling during inflammation, which regulates the expression of inflammatory mediators. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) against TAK1 offers promise as a potential therapeutic strategy in immune-mediated inflammatory disorder including rheumatoid arthritis. Here, we are to evaluate the therapeutic effects of intra-articular administration of adenoviral-mediated siRNA against TAK1 (ad-siRNA-TAK1) on collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in mice. Ad-siRNA-TAK1 was constructed. The murine RAW 264.7 macrophages were infected with ad-siRNA-TAK1, and the silencing specificity of TAK1 was assessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and western blot. DBA/1 mice were injected intra-articularly with ad-siRNA-TAK1. Development and severity of arthritis was assessed histologically. Synovial inflammation and bone destruction were determined by hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining. Articular and serum concentrations of tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin-1, and interleukin-6 were determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Levels of phosphorylated p38, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) were detected by western blot. In vitro, ad--siRNA-TAK1 efficiently inhibited the expression of TAK1 at both mRNA and protein levels. In vivo, intra-articular injection of ad-siRNA-TAK1 efficiently alleviated joint inflammation, decreased the expression of pro-inflammatory mediators, and suppressed JNK pathways. Our results demonstrate the efficiency of ad--siRNA-TAK1 in controlling joint inflammation of CIA, which is associated with the suppression of the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and JNK activation.
Genistein plays an important role in the prevention of atherosclerosis. However, the underlying mechanisms have not been fully investigated. In this study, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were pretreated with genistein (10, 100, and 1000 nM) for 6 h and then exposed to ox-LDL (50 mg/L) for another 24 h. Results showed that ox-LDL induced the expressions of E-selectin, P-selectin, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, interleukin-8, vascular adhesion molecule-1, and intercellular adhesion molecule-1, which were counteracted by genistein. The inhibitory effect was further enhanced with the augment of genistein (10, 100, and 1000 nM). Further analyses demonstrated the effect of genistein was associated with reducing miR-155 and elevating SOCS1, and miR-155 mimics or SOCS1 siRNA acted similarly in genistein ameliorating inflammation. Moreover, the effect of genistein was accompanied with the inhibition of the NF-ĸB signaling pathway. The present study indicates that genistein could reverse ox-LDL-induced inflammation through miR-155/SOCS1-mediated repression of the NF-ĸB signaling pathway in HUVECs.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are innate pattern recognition receptors that play a critical role in allergic inflammation, yet their contribution to autophagy in asthma remains poorly defined. Here, we investigate the role of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in phosphoinositide 3-kinases/protein kinase B (PI3K/Akt) pathway-mediated autophagy in ovalbumin-induced airway inflammation in mice. Wild-type (WT) and TLR2-knockout (TLR2<sup>-/-</sup>) C57BL/6 mice were ovalbumin-sensitized and ovalbumin-challenged. In ovalbumin-challenged WT mice, enhanced expression of TLR2 in lung tissue, remarkable inflammatory cell infiltrates, goblet cell hyperplasia, and increased mucus production were observed. The number of inflammatory cells and interleukin-13 (IL-13) levels increased, while interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) levels decreased in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Expression of PI3K, phospho-Akt, Beclin-1 and LC3-II was enhanced significantly. These changes were mitigated dose-dependently in 3-methyl adenine-treated mice. In contrast, similar but weaker changes were found in ovalbumin-challenged TLR2<sup>-/-</sup> mice, and the changes were not significantly attenuated by 3-methyl adenine treatment. These results indicate that TLR2 confers a pivotal role in allergic airway inflammation via regulating the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway-related autophagy in mice.
Picroside II is the main active ingredient in the root department of Chinese medicine Picrorhiza scrophulariiflora which has been proved to have beneficial effects on health, such as ameliorating the cerebral ischemia and protecting the liver. However, its effects on acute lung injury remain unclear. The purpose of the study was to evaluate the effects of picroside II on acute lung injury in mice and the inflammation in A549 cells which are lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced. We evaluated the levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1 (IL-1β), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in vivo and vitro by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Results showed picroside II significantly decreased the concentrations of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 in cells and mice. In addition, Western blot and immunofluorescence analysis indicated that picroside II suppressed the activation of p65 NF-κB signaling pathway compared with LPS stimulation. In the acute lung injury model of mice, after picroside II treatment, the pathologic changes of lung tissues had been alleviated and lung wet/dry weight ratio was decreased. In summary, picroside II showed the promising effects of anti-inflammation in cells and animals.
Evodiamine (EVO), an important alkaloidal component extracted from the fruit of Evodiae fructus, has been known to possess anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative, and other therapeutic capabilities. In the present study, the effects of EVO on zymosan-induced inflammation and its underlying mechanism were investigated both in vitro and in vivo. Our results showed that EVO effectively suppressed both protein and mRNA expression of interleukin-1β, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in vitro. Zymosan-induced DNA-binding activity of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) was attenuated by EVO, which was achieved through inhibitory effects on the phosphorylation of inhibitory κB α and p65 nuclear translocation, but there was very little association with mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. In vivo, treatment with EVO markedly decreased TNF-α and IL-6 levels in plasma. EVO also repressed inflammatory cytokine expression and ameliorated the abnormal state in both lung and intestine tissues by inactivation of NF-κB. Furthermore, EVO significantly reduced the mortality caused by zymosan. In summary, these results suggested that EVO could effectively suppress inflammatory responses in vitro and in vivo, and may be a potential therapeutic agent against inflammatory disorders.
Increasing evidence indicates anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory effects of electro-acupuncture (EA) therapy. However, its underlying mechanism on delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH), a classic allergic inflammatory disease, still remains unclear. In this study, we aimed to explore the immunomodulatory mechanism of EA intervention in a mouse model of ovalbumin (OVA)-induced DTH. Mice were randomly divided into four groups: Control, OVA-DTH, DTH + EA, DTH + Sham. "Zusanli" acupoint (ST36) was used for DTH + EA, whereas a non-acupoint (localized 5 mm below the "Zusanli" acupoint) was selected for DTH + Sham. Footpad thickness was checked, and the infiltration of inflammatory cells was estimated by hematoxylin and eosin staining. Levels of IgG and IgE in serum of different groups and inflammatory cytokines in the supernatants from homogenized footpads, including IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-4, and IL-5, were determined by ELISA. Cell proliferation of spleen lymphocytes was assayed by 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2-H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT). The frequency of CD4<sup>+</sup>IFN-γ<sup>+</sup> and CD4<sup>+</sup>IL-4<sup>+</sup> T cells was analyzed with flow cytometry. In addition, the mRNA and protein expression of T-bet and GATA-3 were evaluated by real-time PCR and Western blotting, respectively. Our data showed EA treatment at acupoint ST36 relieved the pathological progression of DTH responses via reduction in footpad swelling, infiltration of inflammatory cells, levels of IgG and IgE as well as decreased production of IFN-γ and TNF-α in homogenized footpad tissue. Moreover, detailed studies were performed revealing that EA attenuated the percentage of CD4<sup>+</sup>IFN-γ<sup>+</sup> T cells and prevented Th cells differentiation into Th1 cells, and this results from inhibiting secretion of IFN-γ and suppressing expression of T-bet, an IFN-γ transcription factor. The results indicated that EA treatment improved Th1-mediated allergic skin inflammation via restoring Th1/Th2 balance by curbing Th1 differentiation. These findings suggested that EA at acupoint ST36 might be a useful and promising therapeutic for allergic inflammatory as well as Th1-mediated inflammation response.
The administration of melatonin during acute bacterial infection was evaluated in this study. Mice pre-exposed to normal photoperiodic (NP), short photoperiodic (SP), and long photoperiodic (LP) day lengths were infected separately with live Staphylococcus aureus (5 × 10<sup>6</sup> cells/ml) or Escherichia coli (2.5 × 10<sup>7</sup> colony-forming units/ml) and treated with melatonin (10 mg/kg body weight). Behavioral studies were performed before bacterial infection and after melatonin administration. In mice pre-exposed to SP, exogenous melatonin administration resulted in better clearance of bacteria from blood and behavioral improvement. Reduced glutathione content and superoxide dismutase activities were increased, with concomitant decrease in lipid peroxidation content and catalase activities in the liver, brain, and spleen after exogenous melatonin administration. The overproduction of tumor necrosis factor-α, interferon-γ, and interleukin-6 during acute bacterial infection in mice exposed to different photoperiods was probably regulated by the administration of exogenous melatonin, by reducing neutrophil recruitment to spleen, expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and cyclooxygenase-2 in hypothalamus, and C-reactive protein in the serum, and was also associated with improved behavioral response. Photoperiodic variations in inflammatory and oxidative stress markers might be correlated to serum melatonin and corticosterone levels. This study suggests that the administration of melatonin during SP exposure is protective in infection-induced inflammation than NP and LP exposure.
Inflammatory responses induced by Propionibacterium acnes are a major etiological factor in the pathogenesis of acne vulgaris. Schisandrin A, schisandrin B, and schisandrin C are the representative lignans of Schisandra chinensis (Turcz.) Baill. extract. Although anti-inflammatory effects of the lignans have been shown, their effects on acne-related inflammation caused by P. acnes have not been investigated and compared. We pretreated THP-1 human monocytic cells with 5, 10, and 20 μM schisandrin A, B, and C, and stimulated the cells with P. acnes. Schisandrin B and C inhibited the release of inflammatory cytokines at a concentration of 5 μM, while schisandrin A required a concentration of 10 μM to exert the effects. All of the schisandrins decreased the levels of toll-like receptor 2, and schisandrin B and C reduced the intracellular mRNA expression of the receptor gene. We also studied the influence of schisandrins on the MAPK signaling pathway. Schisandrin A suppressed the P. acnes-induced activation of JNK, while exerting only a weak effect on ERK and p38. Schisandrin B exerted a strong effect on p38, a lesser effect on ERK, and almost no effect on JNK. Schisandrin C inhibited the phosphorylation of all three proteins, especially ERK. Furthermore, the three lignans also prevented the nuclear translocation of NF-κB. These results contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the effects of the three lignans on P. acnes-induced inflammation and suggest that schisandrins might be developed as pharmacological agents for acne therapy.
Neutrophils (PMNs) are key mediators of inflammatory processes throughout the body. In this study, we investigated the role of acrolein, a highly reactive aldehyde that is ubiquitously present in the environment and produced endogenously at sites of inflammation, in mediating PMN-mediated degradation of collagen facilitating proline-glycine-proline (PGP) production. We treated peripheral blood neutrophils with acrolein and analyzed cell supernatants and lysates for matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and prolyl endopeptidase (PE), assessed their ability to break down collagen and release PGP, and assayed for the presence of leukotriene A4 hydrolase (LTA4H) and its ability to degrade PGP. Acrolein treatment induced elevated production and functionality of collagen-degrading enzymes and generation of PGP fragments. Meanwhile, LTA4H levels and triaminopeptidase activity declined with increasing concentrations of acrolein thereby sparing PGP from enzymatic destruction. These findings suggest that acrolein exacerbates the acute inflammatory response mediated by neutrophils and sets the stage for chronic pulmonary and systemic inflammation. 
Obesity is one of the phenotypes of severe asthma, which is considered to be a heterogeneous syndrome; however, its interaction with airway inflammation is not fully understood. The aim of this study was to clarify the role of saturated fatty acids in augmenting airway inflammation induced by house dust mite (HDM) in obesity. Subjects were Balb/c mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) for 10 weeks, followed by sensitization and exposure to HDM. Subjects were also administered palmitic acid (PA) for 4 weeks with concurrent sensitization and exposure to HDM. Airway inflammation was assessed by quantifying the amount of inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and airway resistance was measured. In vitro, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-primed macrophages were stimulated by PA. The amount of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) was examined in the supernatant. Compared to normal chow mice, HFD mice underwent significant increases in body weight; increases in number of lung macrophages, including circulating monocytes and alveolar macrophages; and increases in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) total cell count, including neutrophils but not eosinophils, after HDM sensitization and exposure. In vitro, PA induced MCP-1 and augmented LPS-primed production of IL-1β and TNF-α in macrophages. Among HDM mice that were administered PA, there was an increase BALF total cell count, including neutrophils but not eosinophils, compared to vehicle mice. In conclusion, saturated fatty acid increased the number of lung macrophages and augmented HDM-induced neutrophilic airway inflammation in a HFD mouse model.
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease characterized by articular cartilage degradation and joint inflammation in which microRNAs are significantly involved. Previous studies have reported that miR-142-3p is a novel mediator of inflammatory signaling pathways, but whether miR-142-3p regulates OA remains unknown. In this study, we aimed to investigate the potential role of miR-142-3p in OA and the underlying molecular mechanism. We showed that miR-142-3p was significantly reduced in the articular cartilage tissues from experimental OA mice. The expression of miR-142-3p was also decreased in chondrocytes treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in vitro. Moreover, the overexpression of miR-142-3p significantly inhibited cell apoptosis, nuclear factor (NF)-kB, and the production of proinflammatory cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α induced by LPS. Interestingly, bioinformatics analysis demonstrated that high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), an important inflammatory mediator of OA, was predicted as a target of miR-142-3p, which was validated by dual-luciferase reporter assay. The high expression of HMGB1 in chondrocytes induced by LPS was significantly inhibited by miR-142-3p overexpression. Furthermore, the restoration of HMGB1 markedly abrogated the effect of miR-142-3p. In OA mice, the overexpression of miR-142-3p by lentivirus-mediated gene transfer significantly inhibited HMGB1 expression, NF-kB signaling, and proinflammatory cytokines. Moreover, the overexpression of miR-142-3p significantly alleviated OA progression in OA mice in vivo. Taken together, our study suggests that miR-142-3p inhibits chondrocyte apoptosis and inflammation in OA by inhibiting the HMGB1-mediated NF-kB signaling pathway. The overexpression of miR-142-3p impedes the OA progression in mice in vivo indicating that miR-142-3p is a potential molecular target for OA treatment. 
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is characterized by a rapid loss of kidney function and an antigen-independent inflammatory process that causes tissue damage, which was one of the main manifestations of kidney ischemia/reperfusion (I/R). Recent studies have demonstrated autophagy participated in the pathological process of acute kidney injury. In this study, we discuss how autophagy regulated inflammation response in the kidney I/R. AKI was performed by renal I/R. Autophagy activator rapamycin (Rap) and inhibitor 3-methyladenine (MA) were used to investigate the role of autophagy on kidney function and inflammation response. After the experiment, kidney tissues were obtained for the detection of autophagy-related protein microtubule-associated protein light chain 3(LC3)II, Beclin1, and Rab7 and lysosome-associated membrane protein type (LAMP)2 protein by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PT-PCR) and Western blotting, and histopathology and tissue injury scores also. The blood was harvested to measure kidney function (creatinine (Cr) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels) after I/R. Cytokines TNF-α, IL-6, HMGB1, and IL-10 were measured after I/R. I/R induced the expression of LC3II, Beclin1, LAMP2, and Rab7. The activation and inhibition of autophagy by rapamycin and 3-MA were promoted and attenuated histological and renal function in renal I/R rats, respectively. Cytokines TNF-α, IL-6, and HMGB1 were decreased, and IL-10 was further increased after activation of autophagy treated in I/R rats, while 3-MA exacerbated the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL-6, HMGB1, and anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 in renal I/R. I/R can activated the autophagy, and autophagy increase mitigated the renal injury by decreasing kidney injury score, levels of Cr and BUN after renal I/R, and inflammation response via regulating the balance of pro-inflammation and anti-inflammation cytokines. 
This study was performed to evaluate the possible protective effect of two calcium channel blocker's "lacidipine (LAC) and amlodipine (AML)" on bone metabolism in an experimental ovariectomized and inflammation-induced osteoporosis rat model (OVXinf). For the purpose of this study, the rats were divided into eight groups, each containing eight rats: sham-operated control (group 1, SH), sham + inflammation (group 2, SHinf), ovariectomy (group 3, OVX), ovariectomy + inflammation (group 4, OVXinf), ovariectomy + LAC 4 mg/kg (group 5, OVX + LAC), ovariectomy + inflammation + LAC 4 mg/kg (group 6, OVXinf + LAC), ovariectomy + AML 5 mg/kg (group 7, OVX + AML), ovariectomy + inflammation + AML 5 mg/kg (group 8, OVXinf + AML). The levels of osteocalcin and osteopontin decreased in OVXinf + LAC and OVXinf + AML groups. The serum levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 were increased significantly in the OVXinf rats compared with the SH group. Gene expression levels of the osteogenic factor runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and type I collagen 1A1 (Col1A1) significantly decreased in the OVXinf group, when compared with the control group. AML or LAC administrations increased the levels of Runx2 and Col1A1. These results suggest that amlodipine and lacidipine may be a novel therapeutic target for radical osteoporosis treatment in hypertensive patients.
A putative protective effect of cHb and cWb against H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-induced oxidative damage was evaluated in detail using MRC-5 cells. In addition, the carrageenan (Carr)-induced mouse paw edema model and the cotton pellet-induced granuloma model were employed to examine the in vivo anti-inflammatory activity of cHb and cWb in mice. It was demonstrated that both cHb and cWb treatments significantly increased cell viability and inhibited morphology alterations in MRC-5 cells exposed to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>. Orally administered cHb and cWb significantly reduced Carr-induced paw edema volume and cotton pellet-induced granuloma formation. Moreover, cHb and cWb decreased the expression levels of important pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α), while only cWb was found to increase the expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 significantly. Finally, the activity of antioxidant enzymes (SOD, CAT, and GPx) in the liver improved after cHb and cWb treatment under acute and chronic inflammation. Taken collectively, the results of this study suggest that both cHb and cWb protect against hydrogen peroxide-induced damage in fibroblast cells. Moreover, cHb and cWb were found to exhibit anti-inflammatory activity in both the acute and chronic stages of inflammation and appear to enhance antioxidant enzyme activity and decrease lipid peroxidation in the livers of mice. Therefore, this study indicates that cHb and cWb have great potential to be used in the development of dietary supplements for the prevention of oxidative stress related to inflammatory disorders.
Metallothioneins (MTs) are a family of low molecular-weight and cysteine-rich metalloproteins that regulate metal metabolism and protect cells from oxygen free radicals. Recent studies suggested that MTs have some anti-inflammatory effects. However, the role of MTs in post-burn inflammation remains unclear. This study is designed to investigate the role of MTs in post-burn inflammation in a mouse burn model. MT-I/II null (-/-) and C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice were randomly divided into sham burn, burn, Zn treated, and Zn-MT-2 treated groups. The inflammatory cytokines levels were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity was determined by spectrophotometry. In in vitro study, exogenous MT-2 was added to macrophages that were stimulated with burn serum in the presence or absence of a p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580. The IL-6 and TNF-α messenger RNA (mRNA) expression were detected by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The levels of p38 expression were determined by Western blot. Burn induced increased inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, tumor necrosis factors-α, and macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 production in burn wound and serum. The MPO activities in the lung and heart were also increased after burn. These effects were significantly more prominent in MT (-/-) mice than in WT mice. Furthermore, these effects were inhibited by administration of exogenous MT-2 to both WT and MT (-/-) mice. Exogenous MT-2 inhibited the p38 expression and abrogated the increase of IL-6 and TNF-α mRNA expression from macrophages that were stimulated with burn serum. The effect of MT-2 was not further strengthened in the presence of SB203580. MTs may have a protective role against post-burn inflammation and inflammatory organ damage, at least partly through inhibiting the p38 MAPK signaling. 
Nifedipine-induced gingival overgrowth (NIGO) is characterized by cell proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) component accumulation in gingival connective tissues, with varying degrees of inflammation and fibrosis. Impaired collagen and ECM homeostasis may be among the underlying molecular mechanisms that lead to the fibrotic changes that occur in drug-induced gingival overgrowth (DIGO). Because matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play vital roles in regulating collagen and ECM metabolism, many studies have been performed to reveal the relationship between MMPs and DIGO. It is thought that the gelatinases MMP-2 and MMP-9, both type IV collagenases, are involved in the development of tissue inflammation and organ fibrosis. However, the few studies regarding gelatinase expression in DIGO are controversial. Recent studies have demonstrated the inhibitory effect of cyclosporine A (CsA) on gelatinase expression and/or activity; however, similar changes have yet to be detected in Nif-treated gingival tissues. In this study, we verified that Nif treatment could lead to gingival overgrowth in rats and that gingival inflammation played a pro-proliferative role in NIGO development. Additionally, we examined the temporal expression of gelatinases on days 0, 7, 14, 21, 30, and 40 during NIGO development. The aim was to investigate whether MMP-2 and MMP-9 played significant roles in regulating NIGO development and progression. MMP-2 gene expression was not altered by Nif treatment alone but was significantly inhibited by Nif treatment for 30 days in the presence of local inflammation. However, no significant alterations in MMP-2 protein expression were detected in the Nif-treated gingival tissue, regardless of the presence or absence of local inflammation. Moreover, Nif treatment could lead to transient and significant increases in MMP-9 gene and protein expression levels in the presence of local inflammation. In particular, active MMP-9 expression increased significantly in the gingival tissue that received the combined effect of Nif and ligation treatment; besides, a temporal, but not significant, change was also observed in the gingival tissue that received Nif treatment alone. Taken together, these results provided evidence that temporal changes in MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression occurred during NIGO development. Nif treatment accompanied by local inflammation regulated MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression, primarily MMP-9, which was most likely associated with NIGO severity. Thus, MMP-9 is a potential contributing factor in the process of NIGO development. 
In the present study, we investigated the anti-catabolic effects of coumestrol, a phytoestrogen derived from herbal plants, against interleukin-1β-induced cartilage degeneration in primary rat chondrocytes and articular cartilage. Coumestrol did not affect the viability of human normal oral keratinocytes and primary rat chondrocytes treated for 24 h and 21 days, respectively. Although coumestrol did not significantly increase the proteoglycan contents in long-term culture, it abolished the interleukin-1β-induced loss of proteoglycans in primary rat chondrocytes and knee articular cartilage. Furthermore, coumestrol suppressed the expression of matrix-degrading enzymes such as matrix metalloproteinase-13, -3, and -1 in primary rat chondrocytes stimulated with interleukin-1β. Moreover, the expression of catabolic factors such as nitric oxide synthase, cyclooxygenase-2, prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub>, and inflammatory cytokines in interleukin-1β-stimulated primary rat chondrocytes was suppressed by coumestrol. In summary, these results indicate that coumestrol counteracts the catabolic effects induced by interleukin-1β through the suppression of inflammation. Therefore, based on its biological activity and safety profile, coumestrol could be used as a potential anti-catabolic biomaterial for osteoarthritis.
Endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress) has been increasingly recognized as an important mechanism in various liver diseases. However, its intrinsic physiological role in acute liver failure (ALF) remains largely undetermined. This study aimed to examine how ER stress orchestrates glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) and inflammation to affect ALF. In a murine ALF model induced by D-galactosamine (D-GalN) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA) is to be administered to relieve ER stress. The lethality rate, liver damage, cytokine expression, and the activity of GSK3β were evaluated. How to regulate LPS-induced inflammation and TNF-α-induced hepatocyte apoptosis by ER stress was investigated in vitro. In vivo, ER stress was triggered in the liver with the progression of mice ALF model. ER stress was essential for the development of ALF because ER stress inhibition by 4-PBA ameliorated the liver damage through decreasing liver inflammation and hepatocyte apoptosis. 4-PBA also decreased GSK3β activity in the livers of ALF mice. In vitro, ER stress induced by tunicamycin synergistically increased LPS-triggered pro-inflammatory cytokine induction and promoted the activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in bone marrow-derived macrophages; moreover, tunicamycin also cooperated with TNF-α to increase hepatocyte apoptosis. ER stress promoted LPS-triggered inflammation depending on GSK3β activation because inhibition of GSK3β by SB216763, the specific inhibitor of GSK3β, resulted in downregulation of pro-inflammatory genes. ER stress contributes to liver inflammation and hepatotoxicity in ALF, particularly by regulating GSK3β, and is therefore a potential therapeutic target for ALF. 
Polyomavirus BK-associated nephropathy (BKAN) is an important mechanism for renal losing after kidney transplantation. It seems that Polyomavirus BK can induce nephropathy by direct cell lysis and stimulation of the immune system and induction of inflammation. CXCL10 is a pro-inflammatory cytokine which stimulates the migration and activation of immune cells to the infected sites. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to evaluate the messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels of CXCL10 in the Polyomavirus BK-infected and Polyomavirus BK-non-infected post renal transplanted nephropathic patients in comparison to healthy controls. In this cross-sectional study, Polyomavirus BK-infected post renal transplanted nephropathic patients, Polyomavirus BK-non-infected post renal transplanted nephropathic patients, and healthy controls were enrolled to evaluate mRNA and protein levels of CXCL10 by real-time PCR and ELISA techniques, respectively. mRNA levels of CXCL10 were not significantly different among participants, while serum levels of CXCL10 were significantly elevated in the Polyomavirus BK-infected patients when compared to non-infected patients as well as controls and in non-infected patients when compared to healthy controls. Due to the results, it seems that Polyomavirus BK may potentially induce renal losing through stimulation of inflammation via increasing translation of CXCL10, as a pro-inflammatory chemokine. 
Leukocyte recruitment is a fundamental event in the response of the innate immune system to injury. This process is promoted in part by the opening of endothelial cell adherens junctions that allows leukocyte extravasation through gaps between adjacent endothelial cells. VE-cadherin is a key component of endothelial cell adherens junctions and a negative regulator of leukocyte emigration. Accumulating evidence implicates bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 4 as a critical regulator in vascular biology, but its role in leukocyte extravasation in vitro and in vivo has not been investigated so far. To assess the impact of BMP4 on leukocyte emigration in vivo, we used the thioglycollate-induced peritonitis model. C57BL/6 mice were intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected with recombinant BMP4 in addition to thioglycollate. Compared to solvent-treated controls, we observed higher accumulation of leukocytes in the peritoneal lavage of BMP4-treated mice indicating that BMP4 promotes leukocyte diapedesis into the inflamed peritoneal cavity. Endothelial cell-specific deletion of BMP4 in mice markedly diminished leukocyte diapedesis following thioglycollate administration suggesting that endothelial BMP4 is required for leukocyte recruitment. Consistent with these in vivo results, transwell migration assays with human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) in vitro revealed that recombinant BMP4 enhanced leukocyte transmigration through the endothelial monolayer. Conversely, silencing of endothelial BMP4 by siRNA dampened leukocyte diapedesis in vitro. Mechanistic studies showed that loss of BMP4 improved endothelial junction stability by upregulation of VE-cadherin expression in vitro and in vivo. Vice versa, treatment of HUVECs with recombinant BMP4 decreased expression of VE-cadherin and impaired endothelial junction stability shown by Western blotting and immunocytochemistry. Finally, severe endothelial damage in HUVECs in response to serum of patients collected 24 h after survived cardiac arrest was accompanied by increase in leukocyte migration in transwell assays and activation of the BMP pathway most probably by upregulation of endothelial BMP4 RNA and protein expression. Collectively, the present study provides novel evidence that endothelial BMP4 controls leukocyte recruitment through a VE-cadherin-dependent mechanism and that BMP4-induced inflammation might be involved in the pathogenesis of endothelial cell damage following successful resuscitation after cardiac arrest.
Cigarette smoke (CS), which increases inflammation and oxidative stress, is a major risk factor for the development of COPD. In this study, we investigated the effects of silymarin, a polyphenolic flavonoid isolated from the seeds and fruits of milk thistle, on CS-induced airway inflammation and oxidative stress in mice and the possible mechanisms. BALB/c mice were exposed to CS for 2 h twice daily, 6 days per week for 4 weeks. Silymarin (25, 50 mg/kg·day) was administered intraperitoneally 1 h before CS exposure. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was acquired for cell counting and the detection of pro-inflammatory cytokine levels. Lung tissue was collected for histological examination, myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity assay, superoxide dismutase (SOD) activities, and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels. The phosphorylation of ERK and p38 was evaluated by Western blotting. Pretreatment with silymarin significantly attenuated CS-induced thickening of the airway epithelium, peribronchial inflammatory cell infiltration, and lumen obstruction. The numbers of total cells, macrophages, and neutrophils, along with the MPO activity (a marker of neutrophil accumulation) in BALF, were remarkably decreased by silymarin in CS-exposed mice (all p<0.05). In addition, silymarin pretreatment dampened the secretion of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-8 in BALF. High-dose silymarin (50 mg/kg·day) administration also prevented CS-induced elevation in MDA levels and decrease in SOD activities (p<0.05). Furthermore, the CS-induced phosphorylation of ERK and p38 was also attenuated by silymarin (p<0.05). These results suggest that silymarin attenuated inflammation and oxidative stress induced by cigarette smoke. The anti-inflammatory effect might partly act through the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) pathway.
Glibenclamide has a newly discovered role in inflammation regulation besides its antidiabetic effect. As an inhibitor of ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel, glibenclamide antagonizes the relaxation of the tracheal smooth muscle. This indicates that glibenclamide might attenuate airway inflammation while aggravate airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) in asthmatics. Clinically, many diabetics with asthma are prescribed with glibenclamide to control blood glucose. However, whether glibenclamide could exert any effects on asthmatic inflammation remains unknown. Using an ovalbumin (OVA)-induced mouse model of asthma, we evaluated the effects of glibenclamide on the AHR and inflammation. Interestingly, glibenclamide reduced all the cardinal features of asthma in OVA-challenged mice, including AHR, airway inflammation, and T-helper type 2 (Th2) cytokines. Glibenclamide also downregulated OVA-induced expressions of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) and phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (p-STAT6) in the lung. In addition, increased sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) expression in the lung was observed after the OVA challenge. These findings suggest that the classic sulfonylurea glibenclamide plays an important protective role in the development of asthma, which not only provides the evidence for the safety of prescribed glibenclamide in diabetics combined with asthma but also indicates a possible new therapeutic for asthma via targeting glibenclamide-related pathways. 
The present study aimed to determine the protective effects and the underlying mechanisms of astragalin (AG) on ovalbumin (OVA)-induced allergic inflammation in a mouse model of allergic asthma. Our study demonstrated that AG inhibited OVA-induced increases in eosinophil count; IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and IgE were recovered in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and increased IFN-γ level in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Histological studies demonstrated that AG substantially inhibited OVA-induced eosinophilia in lung tissue. Western blot analysis demonstrated that AG treatments markedly inhibited OVA-induced SOCS-3 expression and enhancement of SOCS-5 expression in an asthma model. Our findings support the possible use of AG as a therapeutic drug for patients with allergic asthma. 
In this study, we investigated the effects of astragaloside IV (As-IV) on pulmonary fibrosis and its mechanisms of action. Sprague-Dawley rats were used in a model of pulmonary fibrosis induced by an intratracheal instillation of bleomycin (BLM). Rats were intraperitoneally injected with As-IV (10, 20, 50 mg/kg) daily for 28 days, while the rats in control and BLM groups were injected with a saline solution. The effects of As-IV treatment on pulmonary injury were evaluated with the lung wet/dry weight ratios, cell counts, and histopathologic. Oxidative stress was evaluated by detecting the levels of malondialdehyde (MDA), superoxide dismutase (SOD), total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC), and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in lung tissue. Inflammation was assessed by measuring the levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β, and IL-6 in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). The results indicated that As-IV treatment remarkably ameliorated BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis and attenuated BLM-induced oxidative stress and inflammation. Our findings indicate that As-IV-mediated suppression of fibroproliferation may contribute to the anti-fibrotic effect against BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Its mechanisms of action are associated with inhibiting oxidative stress and inflammatory response. In summary, our study suggests a therapeutic potential of As-IV in the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis. 
Baicalin, a flavonoid monomer derived from Scutellaria baicalensis called Huangqin in mandarin, is the main active ingredient contributing to S. baicalensis' efficacy. It is known in China that baicalin has potential therapeutic effects on inflammatory diseases. However, its anti-inflammatory mechanism has still not been fully interpreted. We aim to investigate the anti-inflammatory effect of baicalin on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation in HBE16 airway epithelial cells and also to explore the underlying signaling mechanisms. The anti-inflammatory action of baicalin was evaluated in human airway epithelial cells HBE16 treated with LPS. Airway epithelial cells HBE16 were pretreated with a range of concentrations of baicalin for 30 min and then stimulated with 10 μg/ml LPS. The secretions of interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in cell culture supernatants were quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The messenger RNA (mRNA) expressions of IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α were tested by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (real-time RT-PCR). Furthermore, Western blotting was used to determine whether the signaling pathway NF-κB was involved in the anti-inflammatory action of baicalin. The inflammatory cell model was successfully built with 10 μg/ml LPS for 24 h in our in vitro experiments. Both the secretions and the mRNA expressions of IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α were significantly inhibited by baicalin. Moreover, the expression levels of phospho-IKKα/β and phospho-NF-κB p65 were downregulated, and the phospho-IκB-α level was upregulated by baicalin. These findings suggest that the anti-inflammatory properties of baicalin may be resulted from the inhibition of IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α expression via preventing signaling NF-κB pathway in HBE16 airway epithelial cells. In addition, this study provides evidence to understand the therapeutic effects of baicalin on inflammatory diseases in clinical practice. 
Acupuncture has shown beneficial effect in the treatment of multiple dermatologic conditions including dermatitis, pruritus, urticaria, and hyperhidrosis; however, the detailed mechanisms are still kept unclear. This study aimed to investigate if electro-acupuncture (EA) treatment prevents 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB)-induced allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) in rats and explore its underlying mechanisms. ACD was induced by sensitizing and challenging with DNFB topically. Rats were treated daily following bilateral subcutaneous stimulation of EA at Zusanli acupoint (ST36) for 1 week. Ear swelling and serum IgE levels were measured. The ear biopsies were obtained for histology. Inflammatory cytokines on the dermatological ear and local acupoint tissue were assayed. Spleen lymphocytes and the homogenized supernatant of local acupuncture area were used to co-culture for flow cytology and immune analysis, respectively. EA treatment at ST36 notably inhibited ear swelling and inflammatory cell infiltration on DNFB-induced ACD. EA also decreased serum IgE concentrations and alleviated the production of inflammatory cytokines in dermatological ear. Additionally, EA treatment attenuated the percentage of CD4<sup>+</sup>IFN-γ<sup>+</sup> and CD4<sup>+</sup>IL-4<sup>+</sup> T cells associated with ACD. Interestingly, secretion of interleukin (IL)-10 in the local acupoint tissue following EA stimulation was increased and showed suppressive function when co-cultured with the spleen lymphocytes from DNFB group. Lastly, EA treatment demonstrably suppressed p38 MAPK activation in DNFB-treated rats. Our findings suggest that EA treatment at ST36 may ameliorate inflammation associated with DNFB-induced ACD via triggering local IL-10 production and inhibiting p38 MAPK activation, which provide an alternative and promising therapy for ACD.
This study's aim was to investigate the post-effect of an air quality improvement on systemic inflammation and circulating microparticles in asthmatic patients during, and 2 months after, the Beijing Olympics 2008. We measured the levels of circulating inflammatory cytokines and microparticles in the peripheral blood from asthma patients and healthy controls during (phase 1), and 2 months after (phase 2) the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games. The concentrations of circulating cytokines (including TNFα, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10) were still seen reduced in phase 2 when compared with those in phase 1. The number of circulating endothelial cell-derived microparticles was significantly lower during the phase 2 than that during phase 1 in asthma patients. The level of plasma lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP) was significantly decreased in asthmatics in phase 2. The level of norepinephrine was significantly higher in phase 2 than that in phase 1 in plasma from both asthma patients and healthy subjects. There were no significant differences in the gene profile for the toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling from peripheral blood mononuclear cells. In vitro, microvesicles from patients with asthma impaired the relaxation to bradykinin and contraction to acetylcholine, whereas microparticles from healthy subjects did not. These data suggested that reduction in systemic pro-inflammatory responses and circulating LBP and increased level of norepinephrine in asthma patients persisted even after 2 months of the air pollution intervention. These changes were independent of the TLR signaling pathway. Circulating microparticles might be associated with airway smooth muscle dysfunction.
Vascular inflammation plays a key role in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis, a major complication of diabetes mellitus. Orientin, a C-glycosyl flavonoid, is known to have anxiolytic and antioxidative activity. In this study, we assessed whether orientin can suppress vascular inflammation induced by high glucose (HG) in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. Our data indicate that HG markedly increased vascular permeability, monocyte adhesion, the expression of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB). Remarkably, the vascular inflammatory effects of HG were attenuated by pretreatment with orientin. Since vascular inflammation induced by HG is critical in the development of diabetic complications, our results suggest that orientin may have significant benefits in the treatment of diabetic complications and atherosclerosis. 
Inflammation was the important pathological process of many disease developments, but current therapeutic means for inflammatory diseases are not satisfactory. Chemokines and their receptors represent valuable targets for anti-inflammatory drug discovery. The N15P polypeptide (sequence: LGASWHRPDKCCLGY) is independently developed by our research group, it is a new CXCR4 antagonist drug derived from viral macrophage inflammatory protein-II (vMIP-II). This study aims to clarify the anti-inflammatory potency of N15P polypeptide on the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation in vitro. In this study, we evaluated the anti-inflammatory effects of N15P polypeptide by the LPS-induced peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) model and measured the level of inflammatory factors (tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), IL-6, IL-8, nuclear factor kappaB (NF-κB), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), MyD88, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and Akt). The messenger RNA (mRNA) expressions of inflammatory factors were analyzed by real-time PCR (RT-PCR) microarray analysis, and the production of inflammatory factors was measured further by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Western blot. The results showed that the expression of inflammatory factors (TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8, NF-κB, COX-2, TLR4, MyD88, PI3K, and Akt) was downregulated by N15P peptide, suggesting that N15P peptide has a strong inhibitory effect on the inflammatory responses induced by LPS. 
Barrett's esophagus (BE) is generally accepted as the only precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Deoxycholic acid (DCA)-induced inflammation and apoptotic resistance play an important role in the carcinogenesis and progression from BE to EAC. Diallyl disulfide (DADS) is a garlic-derived natural organosulfur compound. This study investigated whether DADS has chemopreventive effects against BE and the potentially related signaling pathway. BAR-T cells were treated with DCA in the presence or absence of DADS. An MTT assay was used to detect the viability of the cells. The apoptosis rate of the cells was measured by light microscopy and flow cytometry. ROS levels were determined by fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. Real-time PCR and ELISA were used to detect mRNA and protein levels, respectively. The levels of target proteins were also determined by western blot analysis. DADS did not inhibit cell viability in a certain concentration range. DADS, similar to the NF-κB inhibitor PDTC, inhibited the DCA-induced ROS production, inflammatory factors, IκBα phosphorylation, and expression of p50 in the nucleus in a dose-dependent manner. DADS also increased the cell apoptosis rate through down-regulating the level of Bcl-2. DADS has low cytotoxicity in BAR-T cells. It has an anti-inflammatory effect in BAR-T cells through inhibiting ROS and the NF-κB signaling pathway. Further, it abolishes the apoptotic resistance induced by DCA in an NF-κB/Bcl-2 dependent manner. DADS may be a good candidate for BE and EAC chemical prevention and therapy.
We previously showed that plants from the genus Sinningia are a source of antiinflammatory and analgesic compounds with different mechanisms of action. The present study evaluated the antiinflammatory, antinociceptive, and antipyretic effects of a crude extract (CE) from Sinningia canescens, its fractions, and 6-methoxy-7-hydroxy-α-dunnione (MHD) in mice. These effects were evaluated using carrageenan (Cg)-induced paw edema, acetic acid- and formalin-induced nociception, mechanical hyperalgesia, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced fever, and plasma cytokine levels. The CE and dichloromethane and hexane fractions reduced Cg-induced paw edema and hyperalgesia, LPS-induced fever, and plasma tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) levels. The CE also reduced acetic acid-induced writhing and the second phase of formalin-induced nociception but did not alter thermal nociception or motor performance. Partition with solvents showed that the antiinflammatory, antihyperalgesic, and antipyretic activities were present in dichoromethane and hexane fractions, and the major compound isolated from these fractions was MHD. Oral and intraplantar MHD administration reduced paw edema. Oral MHD administration also reduced prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub>-induced hyperalgesia but did not alter hyperalgesia that was induced by dopamine and dibutyryl cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Treatment with glibenclamide, a K<sub>ATP</sub> channel blocker, did not alter the analgesic effect of MHD. Lipopolysaccharide-induced fever and TNF-α, interleukin-1β, and interleukin-6 levels were inhibited by MHD. Altogether, these data suggest that the CE has antiinflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic activity, and these actions are at least partially related to MHD. These results also suggest that MHD acts by blocking cytokine synthesis and/or blocking prostaglandin activity.
Secretoglobin (SCGB) 3A2, previously known as uteroglobin-related protein 1, is a secreted protein highly expressed in the epithelial cells of the airways. It has been demonstrated that SCGB3A2 is involved in allergic airway inflammation such as bronchial asthma. However, the role of SCGB3A2 in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced airway inflammation has yet to be reported. The goal of this study was therefore to clarify the role of SCGB3A2 in LPS-induced airway inflammation. We stimulated BEAS-2B, human bronchial epithelial cells, with LPS and analyzed messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and CXCL8 with or without pre-incubation of SCGB3A2. The mRNA expression of TNF-α and CXCL8 was clearly upregulated 3 h after LPS stimulation, and pre-incubation of SCGB3A2 significantly inhibited the upregulation of the mRNA expression. The pre-incubation of SCGB3A2 also inhibited LPS-induced phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), but not p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in BEAS-2B cells. Furthermore, PD98059, a specific inhibitor for ERK, as well as SP600125, a specific inhibitor for JNK, inhibited LPS-induced mRNA upregulation of inflammatory mediators. These results demonstrate the novel biological activity of SCGB3A2, which is that it attenuates LPS-induced inflammation in bronchial epithelial cells through inhibition of ERK and JNK activation. 
Fenton reaction is a new mechanism able to generate advanced oxidation protein products (AOPPs) by exposing the human serum albumin to the Fenton system. Here, we characterized the effects of Fenton reaction-generated advanced oxidation protein products (AOPP-FR) on the gene transcription of the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in human embryonic kidney cells (HEK 293). To investigate the effects of AOPP-FR and AOPP-HOCl on transcription of inflammatory genes, the NF-κB, COX-2, and IL-6 luciferase promoter activities were analyzed. AOPP-FR and AOPP-HOCl were able to induce the activation of the gene transcription of NF-κB, COX-2, and IL-6 in HEK 293 cells. However, the effects of AOPP-FR were significantly higher than the effects of AOPP-HOCl in relation to COX-2 and IL-6. AOPP-FR induces the activation of the gene transcription of NF-κB, COX-2, and IL-6 and may represent a novel pathogenic mediator of inflammation in kidney. 
Psoriasis is a chronic, immune-mediated inflammatory skin disease that has a major impact on patients' quality of life. Progranulin (PGRN) is highly expressed in skin diseases and plays an important role in inflammation response and autophagy. However, the function of PGRN in the immune system and autophagy in psoriasis has not been clearly identified and elaborated on. Thus, this study aimed to investigate the role of PGRN on the inflammatory and autophagy process underlying inflammation in HaCaT cells. We showed that PGRN was markedly highly expressed in psoriasis lesions and inflammatory HaCaT cells. Specific silencing of PGRN promoted the production of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, COX-2, iNOs, and MCP-1. Furthermore, PGRN siRNA promoted autophagy-related gene p62 and suppressed LC3II and Atg7 in HaCaT cells, while overexpression of PGRN showed a contrary effect. Moreover, knockdown of PGRN upregulated the expression levels of β-catenin, cyclin D1, and c-myc proteins. Finally, we demonstrated that IWP-2, an inhibitor of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, stemmed the pro-inflammatory and anti-autophagy effect of PGRN siRNA in TNF-α-treated HaCaT cells. Collectively, our findings suggest that PGRN is upregulated in psoriasis lesions and that the overexpression of PGRN inhibits the inflammation in keratinocytes induced by TNF-α by negatively regulating the production of inflammatory factors and positively mediating autophagy through the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway; this indicated that overexpression of PGRN may be a potential therapeutic option in psoriasis. 
Berberine, one of the active alkaloids from Rhizoma Coptidis, has been indicated to have anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive properties. The aim of this study was to determine the role of berberine on ovalbumin (OVA)-induced delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) and its potential mechanisms. Berberine treatment significantly reduced footpad swelling, inflammatory cells infiltration, anti-OVA IgG levels, IgE concentration in serum, and the tetramer<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>+</sup> cells. In homogenized footpad tissue, the production of Th1-mediated cytokines including IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-2 were suppressed following the administration of berberine. Detailed studies revealed that berberine prevented differentiation into Th1 cells in the OVA-primed lymphocytes, resulting from suppressing the expression of T-bet and secretion of IFN-γ but not IL-4. Concanavalin A stimulation assay and MTT assay also indicated inhibiting effect of berberine treatment on IFN-γ production and decreased cytotoxicity in lymphocytes proliferation, respectively. Additionally, berberine obviously decreased the cell apoptosis and enzymatic activity of caspase-3, which was further confirmed by the facts that berberine clearly lowered Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and expression of cleaved caspase-3 protein. On correlation analysis, the percentage of apoptotic cells showed a significant positive relationship with IFN-γ/IL-4 ratio of supernatant from footpad tissue in berberine-treated DTH mice. These results demonstrated that berberine attenuated Th1-mediated inflammation in OVA-induced DTH by curbing Th1 response and inhibiting cell apoptosis, suggesting a therapeutic potential for berberine for the treatment of type IV hypersensitivity.
Muscle contusion is one of the most common muscle injuries in sports medicine. Macrophages play complex roles in the regeneration of skeletal muscle. However, the roles of macrophages, especially the mechanisms involved, in the regeneration of muscle contusion are still not fully understood. We hypothesize that the depletion of macrophages impairs skeletal muscle regeneration and that pro-fibrotic factors, inflammation, and oxidative stress may be involved in the process. To test these hypotheses, we constructed a muscle contusion injury and a macrophage depletion model and followed it up with morphological and gene expression analyses. The data showed that fibrotic scars were formed in the muscle of contusion injury, and they deteriorated in the mice of macrophage depletion. Furthermore, the sizes of regenerating myofibers were significantly reduced by macrophage depletion. Pro-fibrotic factors, inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and oxidative stress-related enzymes increased significantly after muscle injury. Moreover, the expression of these factors was delayed by macrophage depletion. Most of them were still significantly higher in the later stage of regeneration. These results suggest that macrophage depletion impairs skeletal muscle regeneration and that pro-fibrotic factors, inflammation, and oxidative stress may play important roles in the process.
CD4(+)Foxp3(+)T cells (Tregs) mediate homeostatic peripheral tolerance by suppressing helper T2 cells in allergy. However, the regulation of asthmatic inflammation by local (in situ) Tregs in asthma remains unclear. BALB/c mice sensitized and challenged with ovalbumin (OVA) (asthma group) developed asthmatic inflammation with eosinophils and lymphocytes, but not mast cells. The number of Tregs in the circulation, pulmonary lymph nodes (pLNs), and thymi significantly decreased in the asthma group compared to the control group without OVA sensitization and challenge in the effector phase. The development of asthmatic inflammation is inversely related to decreased Tregs with reduced mRNA expression such as interleukin (IL)-4, transforming growth factor-β1, and IL-10, but not interferon-γ, in pLNs. Moreover, M2 macrophages increased in the local site. The present study suggests that Tregs, at least in part, may regulate the development of asthmatic inflammation by cell-cell contact and regional cytokine productions. 
The increasing wall stress as is elicited by arterial hypertension promotes their reorganization in the vessel wall which may lead to arterial stiffening and contractile dysfunction. The nuclear factor of activated T cells 5 (NFAT5) pathway plays a role in regulating growth and differentiation in various cell types. We investigated whether the NFAT5 pathway was involved in the regulation of biomechanical stretch-induced human arterial smooth muscle cell (HUASMC) proliferation, inflammation, and migration. Herein, we showed that stretch promoted the expression of NFAT5 in human arterial smooth muscle cells and regulated through activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase under these conditions. This may contribute to an improved activity of HUASMCs and thus promote reorganization in vascular remodeling processes such as hypertension-induced arterial stiffening and contractile dysfunction.
IFN-τ, which is a type I interferon with low cytotoxicity, is defined as a pregnancy recognition signal in ruminants. Type I interferons have been used as anti-inflammatory agents, but their side effects limit their clinical application. The present study aimed to determine the anti-inflammatory effects of IFN-τ in a lipopolysaccharide-stimulated acute lung injury (ALI) model and in RAW264.7 cells and to confirm the mechanism of action involved. The methods used included histopathology, measuring the lung wet/dry ratio, determining the myeloperoxidase activity, ELISA, qPCR, and western blot. The results revealed that IFN-τ greatly ameliorated the infiltration of inflammatory cells and the expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6. Further analysis revealed that IFN-τ down-regulated the expression of TLR-2 and TLR-4 mRNA and the activity of the NF-κB and MAPK pathways both in a lipopolysaccharide-induced ALI model and in RAW264.7 cells. The results demonstrated that IFN-τ suppressed the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines by inhibiting the phosphorylation of the NF-κB and MAPK pathways. Thus, IFN-τ may be an optimal target for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. 
Salidroside is being investigated for its therapeutic potential in stroke because it is neuroprotective over an extended therapeutic window of time. In the present study, we investigated the mechanisms underlying the anti-inflammatory effects of salidroside (50 mg/kg intraperitoneally) in rats, given 1 h after reperfusion of a middle cerebral artery that had been occluded for 2 h. After 24 h, we found that salidroside increased the neuronal nuclear protein NeuN and reduced the marker of microglia and macrophages CD11b in the peri-infarct area of the brain. Salidroside also decreased IL-6, IL-1β, TNF-α, CD14, CD44, and iNOs mRNAs. At the same time, salidroside increased the ratio of phosphorylated protein kinase B (p-Akt) to total Akt. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor LY294002 prevented this increase in p-Akt and reversed the inhibitory effects of salidroside on CD11b and inflammatory mediators. Salidroside also elevated the protein levels of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) subunits HIF1α, HIF2α, HIF3α, and of erythropoietin (EPO). The stimulatory effects of salidroside on HIFα subunits were blocked by LY294002. Moreover, YC-1, a HIF inhibitor, abolished salidroside-mediated increase of HIF1α and prevented the inhibitory effects of salidroside on CD11b and inflammatory mediators. Taken together, our results provide evidence for the first time that all three HIFα subunits and EPO can be regulated by PI3K/Akt in cerebral tissue, and that salidroside entrains this signaling pathway to induce production of HIFα subunits and EPO, one or more of which mediate the anti-inflammatory effects of salidroside after cerebral IRI.
Angelicin, a furocoumarin found in Psoralea corylifolia L. fruit, has been reported to have anti-inflammatory activity. The purpose of this study was to determine the protective effects of angelicin on allergic asthma induced by ovalbumin (OVA) in mice. Mice were sensitized to OVA (on days 0 and 14) and challenged with OVA three times (on days 21 to 23). Angelicin (2.5, 5, 10 mg/kg) was given intraperitoneally 1 h before OVA treatment after the initial OVA sensitization. The production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 in BALF and IgE in the serum were measured by ELISA. Lung histological changes were detected by using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain. The results showed that angelicin significantly inhibited inflammatory cells infiltration into the lungs. Histological studies showed that angelicin significantly attenuated OVA-induced lung injury. Meanwhile, treatment of angelicin dose-dependently inhibited OVA-induced the production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 in BALF and IgE in the serum. Furthermore, angelicin was found to inhibit airway hyperresponsiveness and NF-kB activation. In conclusion, our results suggested that angelicin inhibited allergic airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness by inhibiting NF-kB activation.
We previously reported A20 was able to inhibit lipid accumulation in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. We want to investigate whether A20 influences liver fibrosis in this study. Liver tissues from patients with hepatic fibrosis (n = 9) and healthy individuals (n = 7) were studied for A20 protein level by immunohistochemistry. A20 messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein level were also analyzed in two murine hepatic fibrosis models: methionine- and choline-deficient (MCD) diet and extrahepatic bile duct ligation (BDL) operation by real-time PCR and western blot. In vitro, the LX-2 human hepatic stellate cell line was treated by LPS at 0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, and 1 μg/mL for 6 h or at the concentration of 0.1 μg/mL for 0, 6, 12, and 24 h, then A20 expression levels were detected by western blot and PCR. The mRNA level of α-SMA, collagen I, collagen III, TGF-β, IL-6, MCP-1, and TLR4 was also examined by PCR. We then overexpressed A20 in LX-2 cells using adenovirus technique. Levels of α-SMA, collagen I, collagen III, TGF-β, IL-6, MCP-1, and TLR4 were examined in A20-overexpression LX-2 cells. Patients with hepatic fibrosis showed significantly higher A20 protein level compared with healthy controls. A20 mRNA and protein levels were also increased in livers from MCD feeding or BDL operation mice in comparison to normal controls. In LX-2 cells, LPS induced A20 protein in a concentration-dependent manner. The mRNA levels of α-SMA, collagen I, collagen III, TGF-β, IL-6, MCP-1, and TLR4 were increased after LPS treatment. Overexpression of A20 in LX-2 cells inhibited α-SMA deposition and collagen I, collagen III secretion. TGF-β, IL-6, MCP-1, and TLR4 mRNA levels were also reduced in A20-overexpression LX-2 cells in response to LPS stimulation. A20 overexpression inhibits hepatic stellate cell activation, which could be the mechanism for high A20 expression protected livers from fibrosis. Enhancement of A20 expression seems to be rational therapeutic strategies for liver fibrosis.
Inflammation is a physiological part of the complex biological response of tissues to counteract various harmful signals. This process involves diverse actors such as immune cells, blood vessels, and nerves as sources of mediators for inflammation control. Among them serine proteases are key elements in both physiological and pathological inflammation. Areas covered: Serine protease inhibitors to treat inflammatory diseases are being actively investigated by various industrial and academic institutions. The present review covers patent literature on serine protease inhibitors for the therapy of inflammatory diseases patented between 2011 and 2016. Expert opinion: Serine proteases regulating inflammation are versatile enzymes, usually involved in proinflammatory cytokine production and activation of immune cells. Their dysregulation during inflammation can have devastating consequences, promoting various diseases including skin and lung inflammation, neuroinflammation, and inflammatory arthritis. Several serine proteases were selected for their contribution to inflammatory diseases and significant efforts that are spread to develop inhibitors. Strategies developed for inhibitor identification consist on either peptide-based inhibitor derived from endogenous protein inhibitors or small-organic molecules. It is also worth noting that among the recent patents on serine protease inhibitors related to inflammation a significant number are related to retinal vascular dysfunction and skin diseases.
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (OMIM 263200) is a serious condition of the kidney and liver caused by mutations in a single gene, PKHD1. This gene encodes fibrocystin/polyductin (FPC, PD1), a large protein shown by in vitro studies to undergo Notch-like processing. Its cytoplasmic tail, reported to include a ciliary targeting sequence, a nuclear localization signal, and a polycystin-2 binding domain, is thought to traffic to the nucleus after cleavage. We now report a novel mouse line with a triple HA-epitope "knocked-in" to the C-terminus along with lox P sites flanking exon 67, which encodes most of the C-terminus (Pkhd1<sup>Flox67HA</sup>). The triple HA-epitope has no functional effect as assayed by phenotype and allows in vivo tracking of Fibrocystin. We used the HA tag to identify previously predicted Fibrocystin cleavage products in tissue. In addition, we found that Polycystin-2 fails to co-precipitate with Fibrocystin in kidney samples. Immunofluorescence studies with anti-HA antibodies demonstrate that Fibrocystin is primarily present in a sub-apical location the in kidney, biliary duct, and pancreatic ducts, partially overlapping with the Golgi. In contrast to previous studies, the endogenous protein in the primary cilia was not detectable in mouse tissues. After Cre-mediated deletion, homozygous Pkhd1<sup>Δ67</sup> mice are completely normal. Thus, Pkhd1<sup>Flox67HA</sup> is a valid model to track Pkhd1-derived products containing the C-terminus. Significantly, exon 67 containing the nuclear localization signal and the polycystin-2 binding domain is not essential for Fibrocystin function in our model.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations provide high-resolution information about the anatomic structure of the kidneys and are used to measure total kidney volume (TKV) in patients with Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD). Height-adjusted TKV (HtTKV) has become the gold-standard imaging biomarker for ADPKD progression at early stages of the disease when estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is still normal. However, HtTKV does not take advantage of the wealth of information provided by MRI. Here we tested whether image texture features provide additional insights into the ADPKD kidney that may be used as complementary information to existing biomarkers. A retrospective cohort of 122 patients from the Consortium for Radiologic Imaging Studies of Polycystic Kidney Disease (CRISP) study was identified who had T2-weighted MRIs and eGFR values over 70 mL/min/1.73m<sup>2</sup> at the time of their baseline scan. We computed nine distinct image texture features for each patient. The ability of each feature to predict subsequent progression to CKD stage 3A, 3B, and 30% reduction in eGFR at eight-year follow-up was assessed. A multiple linear regression model was developed incorporating age, baseline eGFR, HtTKV, and three image texture features identified by stability feature selection (Entropy, Correlation, and Energy). Including texture in a multiple linear regression model (predicting percent change in eGFR) improved Pearson correlation coefficient from -0.51 (using age, eGFR, and HtTKV) to -0.70 (adding texture). Thus, texture analysis offers an approach to refine ADPKD prognosis and should be further explored for its utility in individualized clinical decision making and outcome prediction.
Large epidemiological studies clearly demonstrate that multiple episodes of acute kidney injury contribute to the development and progression of kidney fibrosis. Although our understanding of kidney fibrosis has improved in the past two decades, we have limited therapeutic strategies to halt its progression. Myofibroblast differentiation and proliferation remain critical to the progression of kidney fibrosis. Although canonical Wnt signaling can trigger the activation of myofibroblasts in the kidney, mediators of Wnt inhibition in the resident progenitor cells are unclear. Recent studies demonstrate that the loss of a Krüppel-like factor 15 (KLF15), a kidney-enriched zinc-finger transcription factor, exacerbates kidney fibrosis in murine models. Here, we tested whether Klf15 mRNA and protein expression are reduced in late stages of fibrosis in mice that underwent unilateral ureteric obstruction, a model of progressive renal fibrosis. Knockdown of Klf15 in Foxd1-expressing cells (Foxd1-Cre Klf15fl/fl) increased extracellular matrix deposition and myofibroblast proliferation as compared to wildtype (Foxd1-Cre Klf15+/+) mice after three and seven days of ureteral obstruction. This was validated in mice receiving angiotensin II treatment for six weeks. In both these murine models, the increase in renal fibrosis was found in Foxd1-Cre Klf15<sup>fl/fl</sup> mice and accompanied by the activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Furthermore, knockdown of Klf15 in cultured mouse embryonic fibroblasts activated canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling, increased profibrotic transcripts, and increased proliferation after treatment with a Wnt1 ligand. Conversely, the overexpression of KLF15 inhibited phospho-β-catenin (Ser552) expression in Wnt1-treated cells. Thus, KLF15 has a critical role in attenuating kidney fibrosis by inhibiting the canonical Wnt/β-catenin pathway.
Rare kidney diseases encompass at least 150 different conditions, most of which are inherited. Although individual rare kidney diseases raise specific issues, as a group these rare diseases can have overlapping challenges in diagnosis and treatment. These challenges include small numbers of affected patients, unidentified causes of disease, lack of biomarkers for monitoring disease progression, and need for complex care. To address common clinical and patient issues among rare kidney diseases, the KDIGO Controversies Conference entitled, Common Elements in Rare Kidney Diseases, brought together a panel of multidisciplinary clinical providers and patient advocates to address five central issues for rare kidney diseases. These issues encompassed diagnostic challenges, management of kidney functional decline and progression of chronic kidney disease, challenges in clinical study design, translation of advances in research to clinical care, and provision of practical and integrated patient support. Thus, by a process of consensus, guidance for addressing these challenges was developed and is presented here.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a hereditary kidney disease characterized by the progressive enlargement of innumerable renal cysts. Although the association of intracranial aneurysms (ICANs) with ADPKD is well known, the relationship between the ICAN and the disease severity including total kidney volume (TKV) and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is poorly understood.
We screened 265 patients with ADPKD (mean age, 48.8 years; range, 14.9-88.3 years) with MR angiography. The patients with a past history related to ICANs were excluded from the study. The incidence and characteristics of ICAN in patients with ADPKD were evaluated. TKV was measured by volumetric analyses of MR imaging.
We detected 65 ICANs in 49 patients (37 women and 12 men, mean age, 52.7 years; range, 20.4-86 years). The incidence of ICANs was 18.5% and female patients had was higher incidence (23.1%) than male patients (11.4%) (p = 0.02). An age of those with ICANs was significantly higher than those without (p = 0.006), and the cumulative risk of diagnosis of ICANs increased with age. TKV was significantly larger in those with ICANs than those without (p = 0.001), but eGFR was not different between two groups (p = 0.07). By multivariate analyses, only TKV was significantly related to the development of ICANs (p = 0.02).
The incidence of ICANs increased with age, was higher in females, and correlated with kidney enlargement in patients with ADPKD. Necessity of screening ICANs would be particularly high in elderly women with large kidneys.
Hypoxia in the embryo is a frequent cause of intra-uterine growth retardation, low birth weight, and multiple organ defects. In the kidney, this can lead to low nephron endowment, predisposing to chronic kidney disease and arterial hypertension. A key component in cellular adaptation to hypoxia is the hypoxia-inducible factor pathway, which is regulated by prolyl-4-hydroxylase domain (PHD) dioxygenases PHD1, PHD2, and PHD3. In the adult kidney, PHD oxygen sensors are differentially expressed in a cell type-dependent manner and control the production of erythropoietin in interstitial cells. However, the role of interstitial cell PHDs in renal development has not been examined. Here we used a genetic approach in mice to interrogate PHD function in FOXD1-expressing stroma during nephrogenesis. We demonstrate that PHD2 and PHD3 are essential for normal kidney development as the combined inactivation of stromal PHD2 and PHD3 resulted in renal failure that was associated with reduced kidney size, decreased numbers of glomeruli, and abnormal postnatal nephron formation. In contrast, nephrogenesis was normal in animals with individual PHD inactivation. We furthermore demonstrate that the defect in nephron formation in PHD2/PHD3 double mutants required intact hypoxia-inducible factor-2 signaling and was dependent on the extent of stromal hypoxia-inducible factor activation. Thus, hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl-4-hydroxylation in renal interstitial cells is critical for normal nephron formation.
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is among the leading causes of end-stage renal disease. Increasing evidence exists that molecular therapeutic strategies targeted to cyst formation and growth might be more efficacious in early disease stages, highlighting the growing need for sensitive biomarkers. Here we apply quantitative magnetic resonance imaging techniques of T2 mapping and diffusion-weighted imaging in the jck mouse model for PKD using a clinical 3.0 T scanner. We tested whether kidney T2 values and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) are superior to anatomical imaging parameters in the detection of early cystogenesis, as shown on macro- and histopathology. We also tested whether kidney T2 values and ADC have the potential to monitor early treatment effects of therapy with the V2 receptor antagonist Mozavaptane. Kidney T2 values and to a lesser degree ADC were found to be highly sensitive markers of early cystogenesis and superior to anatomical-based imaging parameters. Furthermore, kidney T2 values exhibited a nearly perfect correlation to the histological cystic index, allowing a clear separation of the two mouse genotypes. Additionally, kidney T2 values and ADC were able to monitor early treatment effects in the jck mouse model in a proof-of-principle experiment. Thus, given the superiority of kidney T2 values and ADC over anatomical-based imaging in mice, further studies are needed to evaluate the translational impact of these techniques in patients with PKD.
Kidney tubulointerstitial fibrosis marks risk for allograft failure in kidney transplant recipients, but is poorly captured by estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) or urine albumin-creatinine ratio (ACR). Whether urinary markers of tubulointerstitial fibrosis can noninvasively identify risk for allograft failure above and beyond eGFR and ACR is unknown.
Case-cohort study.
The FAVORIT (Folic Acid for Vascular Outcome Reduction in Transplantation) Trial was a randomized double-blind trial testing vitamin therapy to lower homocysteine levels in stable kidney transplant recipients. We selected a subset of participants at random (n=491) and all individuals with allograft failure during follow-up (cases; n=257).
Using spot urine specimens from the baseline visit, we measured 4 urinary proteins known to correlate with tubulointerstitial fibrosis on biopsy (urine α<sub>1</sub>-microglobulin [A1M], monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 [MCP-1], and procollagen type III and type I amino-terminal amino pro-peptide).
Death-censored allograft failure.
In models adjusted for demographics, chronic kidney disease risk factors, eGFR, and ACR, higher concentrations of urine A1M (HR per doubling, 1.73; 95% CI, 1.43-2.08) and MCP-1 (HR per doubling, 1.60; 95% CI, 1.32-1.93) were strongly associated with allograft failure. When additionally adjusted for concentrations of other urine fibrosis and several urine injury markers, urine A1M (HR per doubling, 1.76; 95% CI, 1.27-2.44]) and MCP-1 levels (HR per doubling, 1.49; 95% CI, 1.17-1.89) remained associated with allograft failure. Urine procollagen type III and type I levels were not associated with allograft failure.
We lack kidney biopsy data, BK titers, and HLA antibody status.
Urine measurement of tubulointerstitial fibrosis may provide a noninvasive method to identify kidney transplant recipients at higher risk for future allograft failure, above and beyond eGFR and urine ACR.
Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) constitute a major cause of chronic kidney disease in children and 20% of prenatally detected anomalies. CAKUT encompass a spectrum of developmental kidney defects, including renal agenesis, hypoplasia, and cystic and non-cystic dysplasia. More than 50 genes have been reported as mutated in CAKUT-affected case subjects. However, the pathophysiological mechanisms leading to bilateral kidney agenesis (BKA) remain largely elusive. Whole-exome or targeted exome sequencing of 183 unrelated familial and/or severe CAKUT-affected case subjects, including 54 fetuses with BKA, led to the identification of 16 heterozygous variants in GREB1L (growth regulation by estrogen in breast cancer 1-like), a gene reported as a target of retinoic acid signaling. Four loss-of-function and 12 damaging missense variants, 14 being absent from GnomAD, were identified. Twelve of them were present in familial or simplex BKA-affected case subjects. Female BKA-affected fetuses also displayed uterus agenesis. We demonstrated a significant association between GREB1L variants and BKA. By in situ hybridization, we showed expression of Greb1l in the nephrogenic zone in developing mouse kidney. We generated a Greb1l knock-out mouse model by CRISPR-Cas9. Analysis at E13.5 revealed lack of kidneys and genital tract anomalies in male and female Greb1l<sup>-/-</sup> embryos and a slight decrease in ureteric bud branching in Greb1l<sup>+/-</sup> embryos. We showed that Greb1l invalidation in mIMCD3 cells affected tubulomorphogenesis in 3D-collagen culture, a phenotype rescued by expression of the wild-type human protein. This demonstrates that GREB1L plays a major role in early metanephros and genital development in mice and humans.
Recent studies have reported an association between serum uric acid (SUA) and renal arteriolar changes in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). However, the association in individuals without CKD remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the relationship between SUA and renal arteriolar lesions in individuals without CKD from our living kidney donor cohort.
Between January 2006 and May 2016, 393 living kidney donors underwent "time-zero" biopsy at Kyushu University Hospital. Patients were divided into sex-specific quartiles of SUA before donation: Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 (male: <5.2,5.2-5.8,5.9-6.4, and ≥6.5 mg/dL, female: <3.8,3.8-4.3,4.4-5.0, and ≥5.1 mg/dL). Renal arteriolar hyalinization and wall thickening were assessed using a semiquantitative grading system. Predictive performance was compared between models with and without SUA by calculating the net reclassification improvement (NRI).
In total, 158 (40.2%) patients had arteriolar hyalinization, and 148 (37.6%) had wall thickening. High SUA was significantly associated with arteriolar hyalinization in multivariable logistic analysis (odds ratio [OR] per 1-mg/dL increase in SUA, 1.24; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.00-1.53; p = 0.048. OR for Q4 vs. Q2, 2.22; 95% CI, 1.17-4.21; p = 0.01). We found no association between SUA and wall thickening. When SUA was incorporated into a predictive model with conventional atherosclerotic factors, the NRI was 0.21 (p = 0.04).
High SUA was an independent risk factor for arteriolar hyalinization in individuals without CKD. SUA provided additional predictive value beyond conventional atherosclerotic factors in predicting arteriolar hyalinization.
Recent advances have led to a greater appreciation of how mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to diverse acute and chronic pathologies. Indeed, mitochondria have received increasing attention as a therapeutic target in a variety of diseases because they serve as key regulatory hubs uniquely situated at crossroads between multiple cellular processes. This review provides an overview of the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in chronic kidney disease, with special emphasis on its role in the development of diabetic nephropathy. We examine the current understanding of the molecular mechanisms that cause mitochondrial dysfunction in the kidney and describe the impact of mitochondrial damage on kidney function. The new concept that mitochondrial shape and structure are closely linked with its function in the kidneys is discussed. Furthermore, the mechanisms that translate cellular cues and demands into mitochondrial remodeling and cellular damage, including the role of microRNAs and long noncoding RNAs, are examined with the final goal of identifying mitochondrial targets to improve treatment of patients with chronic kidney diseases.
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is common following deliberate self-poisoning with a combination washing powder containing oxalic acid (H<sub>2</sub>C<sub>2</sub>O<sub>4</sub>) and potassium permanganate (KMnO<sub>4</sub>). Early and rapid increases in serum creatinine (sCr) follow severe poisoning. We investigated the relationship of these increases with direct nephrotoxicity in an ongoing multicenter prospective cohort study in Sri Lanka exploring AKI following poisoning.
Multiple measures of change in kidney function were evaluated in 48 consenting patients who had serial sCr and serum cystatin C (sCysC) data available.
Thirty-eight (38/48, 79%) patients developed AKI (AKIN criteria). Twenty-eight (58%) had AKIN stage 2 or 3. Initial increases in urine creatinine (uCr) excretion were followed by a substantial loss of renal function. The AKIN stage 2 and 3 (AKIN2/3) group had very rapid rises in sCr (a median of 118% at 24 h and by 400% at 72 h post ingestion). We excluded the possibility that the rapid rise resulted from the assay used or muscle damage. In contrast, the average sCysC increase was 65% by 72 h.
In most AKI, sCysC increases to the same extent but more rapidly than sCr, as sCysC has a shorter half-life. This suggests either a reduction in Cystatin C production or, conversely, that the rapid early rise of sCr results from increased production of creatine and creatinine to meet energy demands following severe oxidative stress mediated by H<sub>2</sub>C<sub>2</sub>O<sub>4</sub> and KMnO<sub>4</sub>. Increased early creatinine excretion supports the latter explanation, since creatinine excretion usually decreases transiently in AKIN2/3 from other causes.
Recognition of early stage of diabetic kidney disease, under common practice using biomarkers, namely microalbuminuria, serum creatinine level above 1 mg/dL and accepted definition of diabetic kidney disease associated with creatinine clearance value below 60 mL/min/1.73 m<sup>2</sup>, is unlikely. This would lead to delay treatment associated with therapeutic resistance to vasodilator due to a defective vascular homoeostasis. Other alternative biomarkers related to the state of microalbuminuria is not sensitive to screen for early diabetic kidney disease (stages I, II). In this regard, a better diagnostic markers to serve for this purpose are creatinine clearance, fractional excretion of magnesium (FE Mg), cystatin C. Recently, renal microvascular disease and renal ischemia have been demonstrated to correlate indirectly with the development of diabetic kidney disease and its function. Among these are angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors, namely VEGF, VEGF receptors, angiopoietins and endostatin. With respect to therapeutic prevention, implementation of treatment at early stage of diabetic and nondiabetic kidney disease is able to restore renal perfusion and function.
A significant number of severely obese adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery have evidence of early kidney damage. To determine if kidney injury is reversible following bariatric surgery, we investigated renal outcomes in the Teen-Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery cohort, a prospective multicenter study of 242 severely obese adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery. Primary outcomes of urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio and cystatin C-based estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) were evaluated preoperatively and up to 3 years following bariatric surgery. At surgery, mean age of participants was 17 years and median body mass index (BMI) was 51 kg/m<sup>2</sup>. In those with decreased kidney function at baseline (eGFR under 90 mL/min/1.73m<sup>2</sup>), mean eGFR significantly improved from 76 to 102 mL/min/1.73m<sup>2</sup> at three-year follow-up. Similarly, participants with albuminuria (albumin-to-creatinine ratio of 30 mg/g and more) at baseline demonstrated significant improvement following surgery: geometric mean of ACR was 74 mg/g at baseline and decreased to 17 mg/g at three years. Those with normal renal function and no albuminuria at baseline remained stable throughout the study period. Among individuals with a BMI of 40 kg/m<sup>2</sup> and more at follow-up, increased BMI was associated with significantly lower eGFR, while no association was observed in those with a BMI under 40 kg/m<sup>2</sup>. In adjusted analysis, eGFR increased by 3.9 mL/min/1.73m<sup>2</sup> for each 10-unit loss of BMI. Early kidney abnormalities improved following bariatric surgery in adolescents with evidence of preoperative kidney disease. Thus, kidney disease should be considered as a selection criteria for bariatric surgery in severely obese adolescents who fail conventional weight management.
Chronic kidney diseases (CKDs) are a global health problem. Besides diverse leading reasons in initiation and progression of CKDs, it is evident that they might largely originate from changes in the gut microbial community (microbiota). Mounting evidence indicates that a bidirectional relationship exists between host and microbiome in humans and animals with CKDs. Changes in the microbiota composition and structure (dysbiosis) produce excessive amounts of uremic toxins (e.g. indoxyl sulfate, p-cresyl sulfate and trimethylamine-N-oxide) but less reno-protective metabolites that are implicated in oxidative stress, uremia, inflammation, deterioration of kidney function, kidney diseases progression, a higher prevalence of cardiovascular risk, and mortality in patients with CKD. The present review focuses on the pathogenic association between gut microbiota and kidney diseases like CKD, IgA nephropathy, and kidney stone disease. Certainly, novel insights into the impact of the gut microbiota in kidney diseases can be helpful to develop therapeutic strategies in order to avoid and/or treat aforementioned conditions.
Data on the individual nephrotoxic effects of imidacloprid (IMI) and gibberellic acid (GA<sub>3</sub>) are scarce. Moreover, there is a lack of information about their combined effects on the renal tissue. Our study investigated the effects of IMI and GA<sub>3</sub> separately or together on rats kidney. IMI (64 mg/kg bw) was given for 3 weeks by gavage either individually or in combination with GA<sub>3</sub> (200 mg/L) via drinking water. IMI associated or no with GA<sub>3</sub> increased the levels of kidney malondialdehyde, advanced oxidation protein products, protein carbonyls and metallothionein, plasma creatinine, urea, blood urea nitrogen and lactate dehydrogenase activity. A decline of kidney uric acid level and antioxidant status was also observed. All these changes were supported by histopathological observations. Our results highlighted the role of IMI and/or GA<sub>3</sub>-induced nephrotoxicity. Co-exposure to IMI and GA<sub>3</sub> exhibited synergism in biochemical kidney variables and histopathology and antagonism in physical and morphological parameters.
The global burden of kidney disease is increasing strikingly in parallel with increases in obesity and diabetes. Indeed, chronic kidney disease (CKD) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) coupled with comorbidities such as obesity, diabetes, and hypertension cost the health care system hundreds of billions of dollars in the US alone. The progression to ESRD in patients with obesity and diabetes continues despite widespread use of inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) along with aggressive blood pressure and glycemic control in these high-risk populations. Thereby, it is increasingly important to better understand the underlying mechanisms involved in obesity-related CKD in order to develop new strategies that prevent or interrupt the progression of this costly disease. In this context, a key mechanism that drives development and progression of kidney disease in obesity is endothelial dysfunction and associated tubulointerstitial fibrosis. However, the precise interactive mechanisms in the development of aortic and kidney endothelial dysfunction and tubulointerstitial fibrosis remain unclear. Further, strategies specifically targeting kidney fibrosis have yielded inconclusive benefits in human studies. While clinical data support the benefits derived from inhibition of the RAAS, there is a tremendous amount of residual risk for the progression of kidney disease in individuals with obesity and diabetes. There is promising experimental data to suggest that exercise, targeting inflammation and oxidative stress, lowering uric acid, and targeting the mineralocorticoid receptor signaling and/or sodium channel inhibition could improve tubulointerstitial fibrosis and mitigate progression of kidney disease in persons with obesity and diabetes.
Lymphangiogenesis occurs in diseased native kidneys and kidney allografts, and correlates with histological injury; however, the clinical significance of lymphatic vessels in kidney allografts is unclear.
This study retrospectively reviewed 63 kidney transplant patients who underwent protocol biopsies. Lymphatic vessels were identified by immunohistochemical staining for podoplanin, and were classified according to their location as perivascular or interstitial lymphatic vessels. The associations between perivascular lymphatic density and kidney allograft function and pathological findings were analyzed.
There were no significant differences in perivascular lymphatic densities in kidney allograft biopsy specimens obtained at 0 h, 3 months and 12 months. The groups with higher perivascular lymphatic density showed a lower proportion of progression of interstitial fibrosis/tubular atrophy grade from 3 to 12 months (P for trend = 0.039). Perivascular lymphatic density was significantly associated with annual decline of estimated glomerular filtration rate after 12 months (r = -0.31, P = 0.017), even after adjusting for multiple confounders (standardized β = -0.30, P = 0.019).
High perivascular lymphatic density is associated with favourable kidney allograft function. The perivascular lymphatic network may be involved in inhibition of allograft fibrosis and stabilization of graft function.
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling controls many essential cellular functions. However, the role of Rictor/mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) in regulating macrophage activation and kidney fibrosis remains largely unknown. We report here that Rictor/mTORC2 was activated in macrophages from the fibrotic kidneys of mice. Ablation of Rictor in macrophages reduced kidney fibrosis, inflammatory cell accumulation, macrophage proliferation and polarization after unilateral ureter obstruction or ischaemia/reperfusion injury. In bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs), deletion of Rictor or blockade of protein kinase Cα inhibited cell migration. Additionally, deletion of Rictor or blockade of Akt abolished interleukin-4-stimulated or transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1-stimulated macrophage M2 polarization. Furthermore, deletion of Rictor downregulated TGF-β1-stimulated upregulation of multiple profibrotic cytokines, including platelet-derived growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor and connective tissue growth factor, in BMMs. Conditioned medium from TGF-β1-pretreated Rictor<sup>-/-</sup> macrophages stimulated fibroblast activation less efficiently than that from TGF-β1-pretreated Rictor<sup>+/+</sup> macrophages. These results demonstrate that Rictor/mTORC2 signalling can promote macrophage activation and kidney fibrosis. Targeting this signalling pathway in macrophages may shine light on ways to protect against kidney fibrosis in patients with chronic kidney diseases. Copyright © 2017 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
The extent to which renal progression after acute kidney injury (AKI) arises from an initial step drop in kidney function (incomplete recovery), or from a long-term trajectory of subsequent decline, is unclear. This makes it challenging to plan or time post-discharge follow-up. This study of 14651 hospital survivors in 2003 (1966 with AKI, 12685 no AKI) separates incomplete recovery from subsequent renal decline by using the post-discharge estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) rather than the pre-admission as a new reference point for determining subsequent renal outcomes. Outcomes were sustained 30% renal decline and de novo CKD stage 4, followed from 2003-2013. Death was a competing risk. Overall, death was more common than subsequent renal decline (37.5% vs 11.3%) and CKD stage 4 (4.5%). Overall, 25.7% of AKI patients had non-recovery. Subsequent renal decline was greater after AKI (vs no AKI) (14.8% vs 10.8%). Renal decline after AKI (vs no AKI) was greatest among those with higher post-discharge eGFRs with multivariable hazard ratios of 2.29 (1.88-2.78); 1.50 (1.13-2.00); 0.94 (0.68-1.32) and 0.95 (0.64-1.41) at eGFRs of 60 or more; 45-59; 30-44 and under 30, respectively. The excess risk after AKI persisted over ten years of study, irrespective of AKI severity, or post-episode proteinuria. Thus, even if post-discharge kidney function returns to normal, hospital admission with AKI is associated with increased renal progression that persists for up to ten years. Follow-up plans should avoid false reassurance when eGFR after AKI returns to normal.
Cisplatin is an effective chemotherapeutic agent and widely used in treatment of various solid organ malignancies, including head and neck, ovarian, and testicular cancers. However, the induction of acute kidney injury (AKI) is one of its main side effects. Leukotriene B<sub>4</sub> receptor 1 (BLT1) mediates the majority of physiological effects of leukotriene B<sub>4</sub> (LTB<sub>4</sub>), a potent lipid chemoattractant generated at inflammation sites, but the role of the LTB<sub>4</sub>-BLT1 axis in cisplatin-induced AKI remains unknown. Here we found upregulated LTB<sub>4</sub> synthesis and BLT1 expression in the kidney after cisplatin administration. Cisplatin was found to directly upregulate gene expression of leukotriene A<sub>4</sub> hydrolase and stimulate LTB<sub>4</sub> production in renal tubular epithelial cells. Reduced kidney structural/functional damage, inflammation, and apoptosis were observed in BLT1<sup>-/-</sup> mice, as well as in wild-type mice treated with the LTA4H inhibitor SC-57461A and the BLT1 antagonist U-75302. Neutrophils were likely the target of this pathway, as BLT1 absence induced a significant decrease in infiltrating neutrophils in the kidney. Adoptive transfer of neutrophils from wild-type mice restored kidney injury in BLT1<sup>-/-</sup> mice following cisplatin challenge. Thus, the LTB<sub>4</sub>-BLT1 axis contributes to cisplatin-induced AKI by mediating kidney recruitment of neutrophils, which induce inflammation and apoptosis in the kidney. Hence, the LTB<sub>4</sub>-BLT1 axis could be a potential therapeutic target in cisplatin-induced AKI.
The relationship between mineral and bone disorders and survival according to residual kidney function status has not been previously studied in patients on hemodialysis. We hypothesized that residual kidney function, defined by renal urea clearance, modifies the association between mineral and bone disorder parameters and mortality.
The associations of serum phosphorus, albumin-corrected calcium, intact parathyroid hormone, and alkaline phosphatase with all-cause mortality were examined across three strata (<1.5, 1.5 to <3.0, and ≥3.0 ml/min per 1.73 m<sup>2</sup>) of baseline residual renal urea clearance using Cox models adjusted for clinical characteristics and laboratory measurements in 35,114 incident hemodialysis patients from a large United States dialysis organization over the period of 2007-2011.
A total of 8102 (23%) patients died during the median follow-up of 1.3 years (interquartile range, 0.6-2.3 years). There was an incremental mortality risk across higher serum phosphorus concentrations, which was pronounced among patients with higher residual renal urea clearance (<i>P</i><sub>interaction</sub>=0.001). Lower concentrations of serum intact parathyroid hormone were associated with higher mortality among patients with low residual renal urea clearance (<i>i.e.</i>, <1.5 ml/min per 1.73 m<sup>2</sup>), whereas higher concentrations showed a higher mortality risk among patients with greater residual renal urea clearance (<i>i.e.</i>, ≥1.5 ml/min per 1.73 m<sup>2</sup>; <i>P</i><sub>interaction</sub><0.001). Higher serum corrected total calcium and higher alkaline phosphatase concentrations consistently showed higher mortality risk (<i>P</i><sub>trend</sub><0.001 for both) irrespective of residual renal urea clearance strata (<i>P</i><sub>interaction</sub>=0.34 and <i>P</i><sub>interaction</sub>=0.53, respectively).
Residual kidney function modified the mortality risk associated with serum phosphorus and intact parathyroid hormone among incident hemodialysis patients. Future studies are needed to examine whether taking account for residual kidney function into the assessment of mortality risk associated with serum phosphorus and intact parathyroid hormone improves patient management and clinical outcomes in the hemodialysis population.
Increasing evidence indicates that obesity is highly associated with chronic kidney disease (CKD). GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonist has shown benefits on kidney diseases, but its direct role on kidney metabolism in obesity is still not clear. This study aims to investigate the protection and metabolic modulation role of liraglutide (Lira) on kidney of obesity. Rats were induced obese by high-fat diet (HFD), and renal function and metabolism changes were evaluated by metabolomic, biological and histological methods. HFD rats exhibited systemic metabolic disorders such as obesity, hyperlipidemia and impaired glucose tolerance, as well as renal histological and function damages, while Lira significantly ameliorated these adverse effects in HFD rats. Metabolomic data showed that Lira directly reduced renal lipids including fatty acid residues, cholesterol, phospholipids and triglycerides, and improved mitochondria metabolites such as succinate, citrate, taurine, fumarate and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) in the kidney of HFD rats. Furthermore, we revealed that Lira inhibited renal lipid accumulation by coordinating lipogenic and lipolytic signals, and partly rescued renal mitochondria function via Sirt1/AMPK/PGC1α pathways in HFD rats. This study suggested that Lira alleviated HFD-induced kidney injury at least partly via directly restoring renal metabolism, thus GLP-1R agonist is a promising therapy for obesity-associated CKD.
The development of the kidney relies on the establishment and maintenance of a precise tubular diameter of its functional units, the nephrons. This process is disrupted in polycystic kidney disease (PKD), resulting in dilations of the nephron and renal cyst formation. In the course of exploring G-protein-coupled signaling in the <i>Xenopus</i> pronephric kidney, we discovered that loss of the G-protein α subunit, Gnas, results in a PKD phenotype. Polycystin 1, one of the genes mutated in human PKD, encodes a protein resembling a G-protein-coupled receptor. Furthermore, deletion of the G-protein-binding domain present in the intracellular C terminus of polycystin 1 impacts functionality. A comprehensive analysis of all the G-protein α subunits expressed in the <i>Xenopus</i> pronephric kidney demonstrates that polycystin 1 recruits a select subset of G-protein α subunits and that their knockdown - as in the case of Gnas - results in a PKD phenotype. Mechanistically, the phenotype is caused by increased endogenous G-protein β/γ signaling and can be reversed by pharmacological inhibitors as well as knocking down Gnb1. Together, our data support the hypothesis that G proteins are recruited to the intracellular domain of PKD1 and that this interaction is crucial for its function in the kidney.
Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use is associated with an increased risk of acute kidney injury (AKI), incident chronic kidney disease (CKD), and progression to end-stage renal disease (ESRD). PPI-associated CKD is presumed to be mediated by intervening AKI. However, whether PPI use is associated with an increased risk of chronic renal outcomes in the absence of intervening AKI is unknown. To evaluate this we used the Department of Veterans Affairs national databases to build a cohort of 144,032 incident users of acid suppression therapy that included 125,596 PPI and 18,436 Histamine H2 receptor antagonist (H2 blockers) consumers. Over 5 years of follow-up in survival models, cohort participants were censored at the time of AKI occurrence. Compared with incident users of H2 blockers, incident users of PPIs had an increased risk of an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) under 60 ml/min/1.73m<sup>2</sup> (hazard ratio 1.19; 95% confidence interval 1.15-1.24), incident CKD (1.26; 1.20-1.33), eGFR decline over 30% (1.22; 1.16-1.28), and ESRD or eGFR decline over 50% (1.30; 1.15-1.48). Results were consistent in models that excluded participants with AKI either before chronic renal outcomes, during the time in the cohort, or before cohort entry. The proportion of PPI effect mediated by AKI was 44.7%, 45.47%, 46.00%, and 46.72% for incident eGFR under 60 ml/min/1.73m<sup>2</sup>, incident CKD, eGFR decline over 30%, and ESRD or over 50% decline in eGFR, respectively. Thus, PPI use is associated with increased risk of chronic renal outcomes in the absence of intervening AKI. Hence, reliance on antecedent AKI as warning sign to guard against the risk of CKD among PPI users is not sufficient as a sole mitigation strategy.
CKD appears to be a condition of soluble klotho deficiency. Despite known associations between low soluble klotho levels and conditions that promote kidney damage, such as oxidative stress and fibrosis, little information exists regarding the longitudinal association between soluble klotho levels and change in kidney function. We assayed serum soluble <i>α</i>-klotho in 2496 participants within the Health Aging and Body Composition study, a cohort of older adults. The associations between soluble klotho levels and decline in kidney function (relative decline: eGFR decline ≥30%; absolute decline: eGFR decline >3 ml/min per year) and incident CKD (incident eGFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m<sup>2</sup> and >1 ml/min per year decline) were evaluated. We adjusted models for demographics, baseline eGFR, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio, comorbidity, and measures of mineral metabolism. Among participants, the mean (SD) age was 75 (3) years, 52% were women, and 38% were black. Median (25th, 75th percentiles) klotho level was 630 (477, 817) pg/ml. In fully adjusted models, each two-fold higher level of klotho associated with lower odds of decline in kidney function (odds ratio, 0.78 [95% confidence interval, 0.66 to 0.93] for 30% decline in eGFR, and 0.85 [95% confidence interval, 0.73 to 0.98] for >3 ml/min per year decline in eGFR), but not of incident CKD (incident rate ratio, 0.90 [95% confidence interval, 0.78 to 1.04]). Overall, a higher soluble klotho level independently associated with a lower risk of decline in kidney function. Future studies should attempt to replicate these results in other cohorts and evaluate the underlying mechanism.
Nephrotoxicity is a dose limiting side effect associated with the use of cisplatin in the treatment of solid tumors. The degree of nephrotoxicity is dictated by the selective accumulation of cisplatin in renal tubule cells due to: (1) uptake by organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2) and copper transporter 1 (CTR1); (2) metabolism by glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) and γ-glutamyltransferase 1 (GGT1); and (3) efflux by multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) and multidrug and toxin extrusion protein 1 (MATE1). The purpose of this study was to determine the significance of single nucleotide polymorphisms that regulate the expression and function of transporters and metabolism genes implicated in development of acute kidney injury (AKI) in cisplatin treated patients. Changes in the kidney function were assessed using novel urinary protein biomarkers and traditional markers. Genotyping was conducted by the QuantStudio 12K Flex Real-Time PCR System using a custom open array chip with metabolism, transport, and transcription factor polymorphisms of interest to cisplatin disposition and toxicity. Traditional and novel biomarker assays for kidney toxicity were assessed for differences according to genotype by ANOVA. Allele and genotype frequencies were determined based on Caucasian population frequencies. The polymorphisms rs596881 (<i>SLC22A2</i>/OCT2), and rs12686377 and rs7851395 (<i>SLC31A1</i>/CTR1) were associated with renoprotection and maintenance of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). Polymorphisms in <i>SLC22A2</i>/OCT2, <i>SLC31A1</i>/CTRI, <i>SLC47A1</i>/MATE1, <i>ABCC2</i>/MRP2, and <i>GSTP1</i> were significantly associated with increases in the urinary excretion of novel AKI biomarkers: KIM-1, TFF3, MCP1, NGAL, clusterin, cystatin C, and calbindin. Knowledge concerning which genotypes in drug transporters are associated with cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity may help to identify at-risk patients and initiate strategies, such as using lower or fractionated cisplatin doses or avoiding cisplatin altogether, in order to prevent AKI.
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is characterized by an increasing incidence and poor outcomes in both developed and undeveloped countries. AKI is also acquiring importance in the setting of kidney transplantation (KT): besides all the classical forms of AKI that KT patients may undergo, several transplant-specific injuries can also lead to the loss of graft function. The mechanisms of tissue damage in native and grafted kidneys share several common pathogenic elements. Since appropriate therapeutic treatments are still lacking-probably due to the disease complexity-clinicians are forced to provide only supportive care. In this composite scenario, cell therapies represent an evolving frontier for AKI treatment in native and transplanted kidneys: ex-vivo manipulated stem or immune cells are able to counteract renal dysfunction by a wide range of biological mechanisms. In this review, we will discuss the potential applications of cell therapies in AKI and KT by analyzing the available clinical data and the most promising experimental prospects from a "bench to bedside" perspective.
To address the lack of organs for transplantation, we previously developed a method for organ regeneration in which nephron progenitor cell (NPC) replacement is performed via the diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR) system. In transgenic mice with NPC-specific expression of DTR, NPCs were eliminated by DT and replaced with NPCs lacking the DTR with the ability to differentiate into nephrons. However, this method has only been verified in vitro. For applications to natural models, such as animal fetuses, it is necessary to determine the optimal administration route and dose of DT. In this study, two DT administration routes (intra-peritoneal and intra-amniotic injection) were evaluated in fetal mice. The fetus was delivered by caesarean section at E18.5, and the fetal mouse kidney and RNA expression were evaluated. Additionally, the effect of the DT dose (25, 5, 0.5, and 0.05 ng/fetus-body) was studied. Intra-amniotic injection of DT led to a reduction in kidney volume, loss of glomeruli, and decreased differentiation marker expression. The intra-peritoneal route was not sufficient for NPC elimination. By establishing that intra-amniotic injection is the optimal administration route for DT, these results will facilitate studies of kidney regeneration in vivo. In addition, this method might be useful for analysis of kidney development at various time points by deleting NPCs during development.
The practice of kidney autotransplantation (KAT) has become an increasingly favorable approach in the treatment of certain renovascular, ureteral, and malignant pathologies. Current KAT literature describes conventional open procedures, which are associated with substantial risks. We sought to compare previously reported outcomes, evaluate common surgical indications, and assess associated risks and benefits of current KAT methods. A thorough evaluation and review of the literature was performed with the keywords "autologous transplantation" and "kidney."
Early outcomes of robotic KAT are encouraging and have been associated with fewer complications and shorter hospital stay, but require robotic technique proficiency. KAT is an important method to manage selected complex urological pathologies. Robotic KAT is promising. Nevertheless, future studies should utilize larger patient cohorts to better assess the risks and benefits of KAT and to further validate this approach.
CT volumetry has previously been proposed as an alternative to scintigraphy for the evaluation of pre-donation split renal function and the prediction of post-donation renal function in living kidney donors. The aim of our study was to retrospectively assess the relevance of three CT volumetry techniques for estimating pre-donation kidney function and predicting the risk for chronic kidney disease (CKD) at 1-year post-nephrectomy in a French cohort of living donors using isotopic measures of kidney function.
Kidney volume was quantified pre-donation for 105 donors using three methods total parenchymal three-dimensional renal volume (3DRV), total parenchymal renal volume contouring (RVCt), and renal cortical volume (RCoV). Subjects also had a 51Cr-EDTA scintigraphy to measure glomerular filtration rate (mGFR) pre-donation and 1-year after donation. For each volume, we tested for association with mGFR using univariate regression models, and computed receiver operating characteristics analyses to assess their predictive potential of post-donation CKD.
Our population was composed of healthy subjects, who were predominantly female (69%) with a median age at donation of 51yo. Median mGFR was 102 mL/min/1.73 m<sup>2</sup> at pre-donation and 66 mL/min/1.73 m<sup>2</sup> 1-year after nephrectomy. The pre-donation median volume of the preserved kidney was 156 cm<sup>3</sup>, 163 cm<sup>3</sup> and 99 cm<sup>3</sup> for the 3DRV, RVCt and RCoV methods respectively, with a high correlation observed between each technique (R > 0.84). For all methods, total kidney volume was significantly associated with pre-donation mGFR (P < 0.001). Preserved kidney volume was also strongly correlated with post-donation mGFR (P < 0.0001), with the strongest correlation observed for RCoV (R = 0.60 vs. R = 0.39 and R = 0.51 for 3DRV and RVCt, respectively). Finally, the RCoV method yielded the best predictive value of 1-year post-donation CKD (AUC = 0.80 vs. AUC = 0.76 and 0.70 for RVCt and 3DRV, respectively).
In our cohort of healthy donors with measured kidney function, cortical volumetry (RCoV) appears as the best volumetric technique to use as a surrogate to scintigraphy for estimating pre-donation split renal function and predicting post-donation renal outcomes.
Owing to the urine concentrating mechanism of kidney cells, urea concentration is very high (3.0-5.0M) in mammalian kidneys which may denature many kidney proteins. Methylamines are known to counteract the deleterious effects of urea on structure, stability and function of proteins at 2:1 molar ratio of urea to methylamines. It is known that mammalian kidney cells also contain stabilizing osmolytes, non-methylamines (myo-inositol and sorbitol). A question arises: Do these non-methylmine osmolytes have ability to counteract the deleterious effects of urea on kidney proteins? To answer this question, we took two kidney proteins, namely, sheep serum albumin and Human carbonic anhydrase II. We measured their thermodynamic stability (ΔG<sup>0</sup><sub>N↔D</sub>, the Gibbs free energy change in absence of GdmCl (guanidinium chloride) associated with the equilibrium, native (N) state↔denatured (D) state) from the GdmCl-induced denaturation curves in the presence of different concentrations of urea and each kidney osmolyte individually and in combination. For both proteins, we observed that (i) glycine betaine and myo-inositol provide perfect counteraction at 2:1 molar ratio of urea to osmolyte, i.e., denaturing effect of 2M urea is 100% neutralized by 1M of glycine betaine (or myo-inositol), and (ii) sorbitol fails to refold urea denatured proteins.
Renal ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) induces local inflammation leading to kidney damage. Since pentoxifylline (PTX) and steroids have distinct immunomodulatory properties, we aimed to evaluate for the first time their combined use in IRI-induced acute kidney injury (AKI) and chronic kidney disease (CKD) in rats. In two experiments, PTX (100 mg/kg body weight subcutaneously) was administered 90 min prior to renal IRI or/and methylprednisolone (MP; 100 mg/kg body weight intramuscularly) was infused 60 min after reperfusion of a solitary kidney (AKI model: 45 min ischemia, 48 male Sprague-Dawley rats) or one kidney with excision of contralateral kidney 2 weeks later (CKD model: 90 min ischemia, 38 rats). Saline was infused in place of PTX or/and MP depending on the group. Renal function (diuresis, serum creatinine, creatinine clearance, sodium and potassium excretion, and urine protein/creatinine) was assessed at 48 h and 120 h post-IRI (AKI model) or 4, 16 and 24 weeks after IRI, along with survival analysis (CKD model). More evidently at early stages of AKI or CKD, treated animals showed higher glomerular filtration and diminished tubular loss of electrolytes, more so with PTX + MP than PTX or MP (serum creatinine (μmol/L) at 48 h of AKI: 60.9 ± 19.1 vs. 131.1 ± 94.4 vs. 233.4 ± 137.0, respectively, vs. 451.5 ± 114.4 in controls, all <i>p</i> < 0.05; and at 4 weeks of CKD: 89.0 ± 31.9 vs. 118.1 ± 64.5 vs. 156.9 ± 72.6, respectively, vs. 222.9 ± 91.4 in controls, <i>p</i> < 0.05 for PTX or PTX + MP vs. controls and PTX + MP vs. MP). Survival was better by >2-fold with PTX + MP (89%) vs. controls (40%; <i>p</i> < 0.05). PTX + MP largely protect from IRI-induced AKI and CKD and subsequent mortality in rats. This calls for clinical investigations, especially in kidney transplantation.
Clinical application of the major anticancer drug, cisplatin, is limited by severe side effects, especially acute kidney injury (AKI) caused by nephrotoxicity. The detailed metabolic mechanism is still largely unknown. Here, we used an integrated technique combining mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to visualize the diverse spatiotemporal metabolic dynamics in the mouse kidney after cisplatin dosing. Biological responses to cisplatin was more sensitively detected within 24 h as a metabolic alteration, which is much earlier than possible with the conventional clinical chemistry method of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) measurement. Region-specific changes (e.g., medulla and cortex) in metabolites related to DNA damage and energy generation were observed over the 72-h exposure period. Therefore, this metabolomics approach may become a novel strategy for elucidating early renal responses to cisplatin, prior to the detection of kidney damage evaluated by conventional method.
Proximal tubule protein take-up is interceded by 2 receptors, megalin and cubilin. These receptors rescue an assortment of filtered ligands including fundamental vitamins and hormones. The objective of this study was to investigate the potential relation of megalin receptor injury with nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) upregulation in acute kidney injury rat model. Twenty four rats were allocated into two groups: control group received saline, while the second group was intoxicated with cadmium chloride (2.4 mg Cd/kg/day i.p) for 30 days. Blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, tissue oxidant-antioxidant parameters (malondialdehyde [MDA] and reduced glutathione [GSH]) and expression levels for NF-κB, toll like receptor-2 (TLR2), toll like receptor-4 (TLR4), and megalin receptor were estimated. Noticeable downregulation of megalin receptor versus upregulation of NF-κB, TLR2, and TLR4 were observed in AKI rat model together with significant elevation in MDA as well as significant reduction in GSH. The study concluded that the oxidative stress in kidney tissue leads to megalin receptor damage, which indeed motivates upregulation of NF-κB through TLRs 2 and 4 pathways.
To evaluate T1 mapping as a non-invasive, functional MRI biomarker in patients shortly after solid organ transplantation to detect acute postsurgical kidney damage and to correlate T1 times with renal function.
101 patients within 2 weeks after solid organ transplantation (49 kidney transplantation, 52 lung transplantation) and 14 healthy volunteers were examined by MRI between July 2012 and April 2015 using the modified Look-Locker inversion recovery (MOLLI) sequence. T1 times in renal cortex and medulla and the corticomedullary difference were compared between groups using one-way ANOVA adjusted for multiple comparison with the Tukey test, and T1 times were correlated with renal function using Pearson's correlation.
Compared to healthy volunteers T1 times were significantly increased after solid organ transplantation in the renal cortex (healthy volunteers 987 ± 102 ms; kidney transplantation 1299 ± 101 ms, p < 0.001; lung transplantation 1058 ± 96 ms, p < 0.05) and to a lesser extent in the renal medulla. Accordingly, the corticomedullary difference was diminished shortly after solid organ transplantation. T1 changes were more pronounced following kidney compared to lung transplantation, were associated with the stage of renal impairment and significantly correlated with renal function.
T1 mapping may be helpful for early non-invasive assessment of acute kidney injury and renal pathology following major surgery such as solid organ transplantation.
• Renal cortical T1 relaxation times are prolonged after solid organ transplantation. • Cortical T1 values increase with higher stages of renal function impairment. • Corticomedullary difference decreases with higher stages of renal function impairment. • Renal cortical T1 relaxation time and corticomedullary difference correlate with renal function. • T1 mapping may be helpful for non-invasive assessment of post-operative renal pathology.
Traditional contrast-enhanced methods for scanning blood vessels using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or CT carry potential risks for patients with advanced kidney disease. Ferumoxytol is a superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle preparation that has potential as an MRI contrast agent in assessing the vasculature.
Twenty patients with advanced kidney disease requiring aorto-iliac vascular imaging as part of pre-operative kidney transplant candidacy assessment underwent ferumoxytol-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (FeMRA) between December 2015 and August 2016. All scans were performed for clinical indications where standard imaging techniques were deemed potentially harmful or inconclusive. Image quality was evaluated for both arterial and venous compartments.
First-pass and steady-state FeMRA using incremental doses of up to 4 mg/kg body weight of ferumoxytol as intravenous contrast agent for vascular enhancement was performed. Good arterial and venous enhancements were achieved, and FeMRA was not limited by calcification in assessing the arterial lumen. The scans were diagnostic and all patients completed their studies without adverse events.
Our preliminary experience supports the feasibility and utility of FeMRA for vascular imaging in patients with advanced kidney disease due for transplant listing, which has the advantages of obtaining both arteriography and venography using a single test without nephrotoxicity.
• Evaluation of vascular disease is important in planning kidney transplantation. • Standard vascular imaging methods are often problematic in kidney disease patients. • FeMRA has the advantage of arteriography and venography in a single test. • FeMRA is safe and non-nephrotoxic. • FeMRA is not limited by arterial calcification.
Acquired cystic kidney disease (ACKD) is a condition that occurs predominantly in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). In contrast to hereditary cystic kidney disease, ACKD is characterized by the presence of multiple small cysts in bilaterally small kidneys. Limited pediatric data suggest a high incidence (21.6-45.8%) of ACKD in children on dialysis, comparable to that in adults, with an increased frequency associated with a longer duration of dialysis. Recent research has shed light on the pathogenesis of ACKD, such as activation of proto-oncogenes. Although most patients with ACKD are asymptomatic, the condition can be complicated by renal cell carcinoma. Routine surveillance should therefore be considered in at-risk populations.
Colistin (polymyxin E) is a mainly concentration-dependent bactericidal antimicrobial active against multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria. After being abandoned over the past 30 years due to its neuro- and nephrotoxicity, colistin has been reintroduced recently as a last-resort drug for the treatment of multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria infections in combination with other antimicrobials. Unfortunately, although renal toxicity is a well-known dose-related adverse effect of colistin, relatively few studies are currently available on its peculiar pharmacodynamic/pharmacokinetic properties in clinical settings at high risk for drug accumulation, such as acute or chronic kidney disease. In these specific contexts, the risk for underdosing is also substantial because colistin can be easily removed by dialysis/hemofiltration, especially when the most efficient modalities of renal replacement therapy (RRT) are used in critically ill patients. For this reason, recent recommendations in patients undergoing RRT have shifted toward higher dosing regimens, and therapeutic drug monitoring is advised. This review aims to summarize the main issues related to chemical structure, pharmacodynamics/pharmacokinetics, and renal toxicity of colistin. Moreover, recent data and current recommendations concerning colistin dosing in patients with reduced kidney function, with special regard to those receiving RRT such as dialysis or hemofiltration, are also discussed. 
Racial differences in rapid kidney function decline exist, but less is known regarding factors associated with rapid decline among African Americans. Greater understanding of potentially modifiable risk factors for early kidney function loss may help reduce the burden of kidney failure in this high-risk population.
Prospective cohort study.
3,653 African American participants enrolled in the Jackson Heart Study (JHS) with kidney function data from 2 of 3 examinations (2000-2004 and 2009-2013). Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was calculated from serum creatinine using the CKD-EPI creatinine equation.
Demographics, socioeconomic status, lifestyle, and clinical risk factors for kidney failure.
Rapid decline was defined as a ≥30% decline in eGFR during follow-up. We quantified the association of risk factors with rapid decline in multivariable models.
Clinical (systolic blood pressure and albuminuria [albumin-creatinine ratio]) and modifiable risk factors.
Mean age was 54±12 (SD) years, 37% were men, average body mass index was 31.8±7.1kg/m(2), 19% had diabetes mellitus (DM), and mean eGFR was 96.0±20mL/min/1.73m(2) with an annual rate of decline of 1.27mL/min/1.73m(2). Those with rapid decline (11.5%) were older, were more likely to be of low/middle income, and had higher systolic blood pressures and greater DM than those with nonrapid decline. Factors associated with ≥30% decline were older age (adjusted OR per 10 years older, 1.51; 95% CI, 1.34-1.71), cardiovascular disease (adjusted OR, 1.53; 95% CI, 1.12-2.10), higher systolic blood pressure (adjusted OR per 17mmHg greater, 1.22; 95% CI, 1.06-1.41), DM (adjusted OR, 2.63; 95% CI, 2.02-3.41), smoking (adjusted OR, 1.60; 95% CI, 1.10-2.31), and albumin-creatinine ratio > 30mg/g (adjusted OR, 1.55; 95% CI, 1.08-1.21). Conversely, results did not support associations of waist circumference, C-reactive protein level, and physical activity with rapid decline.
No midstudy creatinine measurement at examination 2 (2005-2008).
Rapid decline heterogeneity exists among African Americans in JHS. Interventions targeting potentially modifiable factors may help reduce the incidence of kidney failure.
Diets high in acid of developed societies that do not cause metabolic acidosis in patients with chronic kidney disease nevertheless appear to cause acid retention with associated morbidity, particularly in those with reduced glomerular filtration rate. Here we used a rat 2/3 nephrectomy model of chronic kidney disease to study induction and maintenance of acid retention and its consequences on indicators of kidney and bone injury. Dietary acid was increased in animals eating base-producing soy protein with acid-producing casein and in casein-eating animals with added ammonium chloride. Using microdialysis to measure the kidney cortical acid content, we found that nephrectomized animals had greater acid retention than sham-operated animals when both ate the soy diet. Each increment in dietary acid further increased acid retention more in nephrectomized than in sham rats. Nephrectomized and sham animals achieved similar steady-state daily urine net acid excretion in response to increments in dietary acid but nephrectomized animals took longer to do so, contributing to greater acid retention that was maintained until the increased dietary acid was stopped. Acid retention was associated with increased urine excretion of both N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase and deoxypyridinoline, greater in nephrectomized than control rats, consistent with kidney tubulointerstitial and bone matrix injury, respectively. Greater acid retention in nephrectomized than control animals was induced by a slower increase in urinary net acid excretion rate in response to the increment in dietary acid and also maintained until the dietary acid increment was stopped. Thus, acid retention increased biomarkers of kidney and bone injury in the urine, supporting untoward consequences to these two tissues.
The rate and factors that influence progression of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in developing countries like India are unknown. A pan-country prospective, observational cohort study is needed to address these knowledge gaps.
The Indian Chronic Kidney Disease (ICKD) study will be a cohort study of approximately 5000 patients with mild to moderate CKD presenting to centres that represent different geographical regions in India. Time to 50% decline in baseline estimated glomerular filtration rate, need of renal replacement therapy or any new cardiovascular disease (CVD) event or death from CVD are the primary end points.
This study will provide the opportunity to determine risk factors for CKD progression and development of CVD in Indian subjects and perform international comparisons to determine ethnic and geographical differences. A bio-repository will provide a chance to discover biomarkers and explore genetic risk factors.
To evaluate the possibility of using 3D-printing in the management of patients with localized kidney cancer.
The study comprised five patients with localized kidney cancer who were treated at the Urology Clinic of the I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University from January 2016 to April 2017. Along with the standard examination, the patients underwent multispiral computed tomography (MSCT) to produce patient-specific 3D-printed models of the kidney tumors using 3D modeling and 3D printing. To evaluate the effectiveness of using 3D-printed models, two-stage preoperative planning was conducted, and five surgeons were surveyed using a four-question multiple choice questionnaire. At the first stage, the planning of operations was carried out based on MSCT findings. At the second stage, the surgeons were given patient-specific soft 3D models of the kidney with a tumor for preoperative training. After preoperative training, patients underwent laparoscopic resection of the kidney with a tumor.
According to the survey results, each of the participating surgeons at least once changed surgical plan based on data obtained with 3D printed models of the kidney with the tumor. The implementation of preoperative training using 3D printed models of the kidney turned out to be effective. All patients underwent laparoscopic surgery performed by a single surgeon with extensive experience in this type of surgery. The mean operative time was 187 minutes. All operations were performed with main renal artery occlusion. The men warm ischemia time was 19.5 minutes and the mean blood loss was 170 ml. There were no conversions to open surgery and organ-removing operations. There were no postoperative complications or deaths. All surgical margins were negative. Morphological examination showed that four patients had renal cell carcinoma one patient had the oncocytoma.
The study demonstrated the promise of using 3D printing for preoperative planning and surgical performance due to a high-precision three-dimensional soft patient-specific model of the localized kidney.
Cystic epithelia acquire mesenchymal-like features in polycystic kidney disease (PKD). In this phenotypic alteration, it is well known that transforming growth factor (TGF)-β/Smad3 signaling is involved; however, there is emerging new data on Smad3 phosphoisoforms: Smad3 phosphorylated at linker regions (pSmad3L), COOH-terminal regions (pSmad3C), and both (pSmad3L/C). pSmad3L/C has a pathological role in colorectal cancer. Mesenchymal phenotype-specific cell responses in the TGF-β/Smad3 pathway are implicated in carcinomas. In this study, we confirmed mesenchymal features and examined Smad3 phosphoisoforms in the <i>cpk</i> mouse, a model of autosomal recessive PKD. Kidney sections were stained with antibodies against mesenchymal markers and domain-specific phospho-Smad3. TGF-β, pSmad3L, pSmad3C, JNK, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4, and c-Myc were evaluated by Western blotting. Cophosphorylation of pSmad3L/C was assessed by immunoprecipitation. α-Smooth muscle actin, which indicates mesenchymal features, was expressed higher in <i>cpk</i> mice. pSmad3L expression was increased in <i>cpk</i> mice and was predominantly localized in the nuclei of tubular epithelial cells in cysts; however, pSmad3C was equally expressed in both <i>cpk</i> and control mice. Levels of pSmad3L, JNK, CDK4, and c-Myc protein in nuclei were significantly higher in <i>cpk</i> mice than in controls. Immunoprecipitation showed that Smad3 was cophosphorylated (pSmad3L/C) in <i>cpk</i> mice. Smad3 knockout/<i>cpk</i> double-mutant mice revealed amelioration of <i>cpk</i> abnormalities. These findings suggest that upregulating c-Myc through the JNK/CDK4-dependent pSmad3L pathway may be key to the pathophysiology in <i>cpk</i> mice. In conclusion, a qualitative rather than a quantitative abnormality of the TGF-β/Smad3 pathway is involved in PKD and may be a target for disease-specific intervention.
Acute kidney disease (AKI) leads to increased risk of progression to chronic kidney disease (CKD). Antithrombin III (ATIII) is a potent anticoagulant with anti-inflammatory properties, and we previously reported that insufficiencies of ATIII exacerbated renal ischaemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) in rats. In this study, we examined the characteristic of AKI-CKD transition in rats with two distinct AKI models. Based on our observation, left IRI plus right nephrectomy (NX-IRI) was used to determine whether ATIII had therapeutic effects in preventing CKD progression after AKI. It was observed that NX-IRI resulted in significant functional and histological damage at 5 weeks after NX-IRI compared with sham rats, which was mitigated by ATIII administration. Besides, we noticed that ATIII administration significantly reduced NX-IRI-induced interstitial fibrosis. Consistently, renal expression of collagen-1, α-smooth muscle actin and fibronectin were substantial diminished in ATIII-administered rats compared with un-treated NX-IRI rats. Furthermore, the beneficial effects of ATIII were accompanied with decreased M1-like macrophage recruitment and down-regulation of M1-like macrophage-dependent pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor α, inducible nitric oxide synthase and interleukin-1β, indicating that ATIII prevented AKI-CKD transition via inhibiting inflammation. Overall, ATIII shows potential as a therapeutic strategy for the prevention of CKD progression after AKI.
Management of patients with large and staghorn stones of a solitary kidney is widely debated among urologists and has not been sufficiently investigated, which determined the relevance of this study.
The study comprised 80 patients with large (>20 mm) and staghorn stones of an anatomically or functionally solitary kidney. Of them, 58 patients underwent percutaneous nephrolithotripsy (PNL), and 22 had open surgery. The criterion of the treatment effectiveness was the complete stone clearance or small residual fragments sized less than 3 mm. The safety criterion was the absence of intra- and postoperative complications, according to Clavien-Dindo grading system. The study analyzed the following factors influencing the effectiveness and safety of PNL: the number of accesses; nephroscope diameter; use of a nephroscope sheath; type of lithotripter; size, density, type and composition of the stone.
Percutaneous nephrolithotripsy demonstrated statistically significantly better safety results compared with open surgery with comparable effectiveness. Long-term stone recurrence rate after PNL and open surgery was 10.4 and 18.2%, respectively. PNL resulted in a statistically significant improvement in the kidney function while it worsened after open surgery. The effectiveness of PNL depends on the stone type and size and the kind of lithotripter. It was 7.5 times greater for a large stone than for staghorn calculi and 4.6 times higher for stones sized less or equal 45 mm than for those sized > 45 mm. Ultrasonic lithotripter was 2.2 times more effective than another type of lithotripter. The safety of PNL depends on the nephroscope diameter, of a sheath, the number of accesses, the type of lithotripter and the type of stone. Using a 24-Ch nephroscope was 3.6 times safer than that with a diameter greater than 24-Ch; not using a sheath was 3.2 times safer than using it; one access was 3 times safer than at multiple ones; using an ultrasound lithotripter was 2.7 times safer than with another type of lithotripter; treating a large stone was 2.1 times safer than a staghorn stone.
The study findings can be used to optimize the treatment of patients with large and staghorn stones of a solitary kidney.
Pelvic kidney is a relatively common renal malformation as well as duplex kidney; however, the unilateral coexistence of these abnormalities is not frequently found. We present a case of a young woman with a history of hypertension in whom a pelvic and dysmorphic left kidney was discovered during ultrasound examination performed for the study of the renal arteries. Magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography imaging revealed a duplex pelvic kidney. This combination is very rare; we have not found a similar case reported in the literature.
Undernutrition during childhood leads to chronic diseases in adult life including hypertension, diabetes and chronic kidney disease. Here we explore the hypothesis that physiological alterations in the bioactive lipids pattern within kidney tissue might be involved in the progression of chronic kidney disease.
Membrane fractions from kidney homogenates of undernourished rats (RBD) were submitted to lipid extraction and analysis by thin layer chromatography and cholesterol determination.
Kidneys from RBD rats had 25% lower cholesterol content, which disturb membrane microdomains, affecting Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis and the enzymes responsible for important lipid mediators such as phosphatidylinositol-4 kinase, sphingosine kinase, diacylglicerol kinase and phospholipase A<sub>2</sub>. We observed a decrease in phosphatidylinositol(4)-phosphate (8.8 ± 0.9 vs. 3.6 ± 0.7 pmol.mg<sup>-1</sup>.mim<sup>-1</sup>), and an increase in phosphatidic acid (2.2 ± 0.8 vs. 3.8 ± 1.3 pmol.mg<sup>-1</sup>.mim<sup>-1</sup>), being these lipid mediators involved in the regulation of key renal functions. Ceramide levels are augmented in kidney tissue from RBD rats (18.7 ± 1.4 vs. 21.7 ± 1.5 fmol.mg<sup>-1</sup>.min<sup>-1</sup>) indicating an ongoing renal lesion.
Results point to an imbalance in the bioactive lipid generation with further consequences to key events related to kidney function, thus contributing to the establishment of chronic kidney disease.
Avian infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) that causes respiratory and nephritic diseases in chicken is a major poultry pathogen leading to serious economic loss worldwide. The nephropathogenic IBV strains cause nephritis and kidney lesions intrinsically and the pathogenic mechanism is still unclear. In the present study, SPF chicks were infected with three nephropathogenic IBVs of different virulence and their gene expression profiles in chicken kidney were compared at transcriptome level. As a result, 1279 differentially expressed (DE) genes were found in very virulent SCDY2 inoculated group, 145 in virulent SCK2 group and 74 in non-virulent LDT3-A group when compared to mock infected group. Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis on SCDY2 group displayed that the up-regulated DE genes were mainly involved in cell apoptosis, and the down-regulated genes were involved in metabolic processes and DNA replication. Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) analysis showed that DE genes in SCDY2 group formed a network, and the core of the network was composed by cell apoptosis and immune response proteins. The clustering of gene expression profile among the three virus inoculated groups indicated that the majority of up-regulated DE genes on apoptosis in very virulent SCDY2 group were up-regulated more or less in virulent SCK2 group and those down-regulated on innate immune response in SCDY2 group were also down-regulated differently in SCK2 group. In addition, the number of apoptotic cells detected experimentally in kidney tissue were very different among the three virus inoculated groups and were positively accordant with the viral titer, kidney lesions and viral virulence of each group. Taken all together, the present study revealed that virulent nephropathogenic IBV infection modified a number of gene expression and induction of apoptosis in kidney cells may be a major pathogenic determinant for virulent nephropathogenic IBV.
Toxic effects of ethylene glycol (EG) and its metabolites are mainly related to metabolic acidosis and kidney damage. EG biotransformation involving CYP2E1 affects the oxidant-antioxidant balance. The study assessed the effect of repeated administration of 4-methylpyrazole (4MP, 15mg/kg b.w. after 2h, followed by 10mg/kg b.w. every 12h) on renal function (creatinine, urea and urinary protein levels) as well as products of kidney's lipid peroxidation (MDA and TBARS levels) in rats poisoned with EG (5745mg/kg b.w.). Serum EG and glycolic acid (GA) concentrations were measured throughout the experiment. Repeated administration of 4MP reduced the rate of EG elimination, extended the period of EG persistence in serum and significantly limited formation of GA. The study showed the temporary intensification of kidney oxidative processes that correlated with changes in kidney function. It was found that the use of 4MP in EG poisoning inhibited its biotransformation to toxic metabolites, but simultaneously intensified oxidative damages in kidneys.
Refractory hypertension is a recently described phenotype of antihypertensive treatment failure defined as uncontrolled blood pressure (BP) despite the use of ≥5 different antihypertensive agents, including chlorthalidone and spironolactone. Recent studies indicate that refractory hypertension is uncommon, with a prevalence of ≈5% to 10% of patients referred to a hypertension specialty clinic for uncontrolled hypertension. The prevalence of white-coat effect, that is, uncontrolled automated office BP ≥135/85 mm Hg and controlled out-of-office BP <135/85 mm Hg, by awake ambulatory BP monitor in hypertensive patients overall is ≈30% to 40%. The prevalence of white-coat effect among patients with refractory hypertension has not been previously reported. In this prospective evaluation, consecutive patients referred to the University of Alabama at Birmingham Hypertension Clinic for uncontrolled hypertension were enrolled. Refractory hypertension was defined as uncontrolled automated office BP ≥135/85 mm Hg with the use of ≥5 antihypertensive agents, including chlorthalidone and spironolactone. Automated office BP measurements were based on 6 serial readings, done automatically with the use of a BpTRU device unobserved in the clinic. Out-of-office BP measurements were done by 24-hour ambulatory BP monitor. Thirty-four patients were diagnosed with refractory hypertension, of whom 31 had adequate ambulatory BP monitor readings. White-coat effect was present in only 2 patients, or 6.5% of the 31 patients with refractory hypertension, suggesting that white-coat effect is largely absent in patients with refractory hypertension. These findings suggest that white-coat effect is not a common cause of apparent lack of BP control in patients failing maximal antihypertensive treatment.
Despite advancements in lowering blood pressure, the best approach to lower it remains controversial because of the lack of information on the molecular basis of hypertension. We, therefore, performed plasma proteomics of plasma from patients with hypertension to identify molecular determinants detectable in these subjects but not in controls and vice versa. Plasma samples from hypertensive subjects (cases; n=118) and controls (n=85) from the InGenious HyperCare cohort were used for this study and performed mass spectrometric analysis. Using biostatistical methods, plasma peptides specific for hypertension were identified, and a model was developed using least absolute shrinkage and selection operator logistic regression. The underlying peptides were identified and sequenced off-line using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization orbitrap mass spectrometry. By comparison of the molecular composition of the plasma samples, 27 molecular determinants were identified differently expressed in cases from controls. Seventy percent of the molecular determinants selected were found to occur less likely in hypertensive patients. In cross-validation, the overall <i>R</i><sup>2</sup> was 0.434, and the area under the curve was 0.891 with 95% confidence interval 0.8482 to 0.9349, <i>P</i><0.0001. The mean values of the cross-validated proteomic score of normotensive and hypertensive patients were found to be -2.007±0.3568 and 3.383±0.2643, respectively, <i>P</i><0.0001. The molecular determinants were successfully identified, and the proteomic model developed shows an excellent discriminatory ability between hypertensives and normotensives. The identified molecular determinants may be the starting point for further studies to clarify the molecular causes of hypertension.
Hypertension is a major global health problem, but prevalence rates vary widely among regions. To determine prevalence, treatment, and control rates of hypertension, we measured conventional blood pressure (BP) and 24-hour ambulatory BP in 6546 subjects, aged 40 to 79 years, recruited from 10 community-dwelling cohorts on 3 continents. We determined how between-cohort differences in risk factors and socioeconomic factors influence hypertension rates. The overall prevalence was 49.3% (range between cohorts, 40.0%-86.8%) for conventional hypertension (conventional BP ≥140/90 mm Hg) and 48.7% (35.2%-66.5%) for ambulatory hypertension (ambulatory BP ≥130/80 mm Hg). Treatment and control rates for conventional hypertension were 48.0% (33.5%-74.1%) and 38.6% (10.1%-55.3%) respectively. The corresponding rates for ambulatory hypertension were 48.6% (30.5%-71.9%) and 45.6% (18.6%-64.2%). Among 1677 untreated subjects with conventional hypertension, 35.7% had white coat hypertension (23.5%-56.2%). Masked hypertension (conventional BP <140/90 mm Hg and ambulatory BP ≥130/80 mm Hg) occurred in 16.9% (8.8%-30.5%) of 3320 untreated subjects who were normotensive on conventional measurement. Exclusion of participants with diabetes mellitus, obesity, hypercholesterolemia, or history of cardiovascular complications resulted in a <9% reduction in the conventional and 24-hour ambulatory hypertension rates. Higher social and economic development, measured by the Human Development Index, was associated with lower rates of conventional and ambulatory hypertension. In conclusion, high rates of hypertension in all cohorts examined demonstrate the need for improvements in prevention, treatment, and control. Strategies for the management of hypertension should continue to not only focus on preventable and modifiable risk factors but also consider societal issues.
The calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine A (CsA) suppresses the immune system but promotes hypertension, vascular dysfunction, and renal damage. CsA decreases regulatory T cells and this contributes to the development of hypertension. However, CsA's effects on another important regulatory immune cell subset, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), is unknown. We hypothesized that augmenting MDSCs would ameliorate the CsA-induced hypertension and vascular and renal injury and dysfunction and that CsA reduces MDSCs in mice. Daily interleukin-33 treatment, which increased MDSC levels, completely prevented CsA-induced hypertension and vascular and renal toxicity. Adoptive transfer of MDSCs from control mice into CsA-treated mice after hypertension was established dose-dependently reduced blood pressure and vascular and glomerular injury. CsA treatment of aortas and kidneys isolated from control mice for 24 hours decreased relaxation responses and increased inflammation, respectively, and these effects were prevented by the presence of MDSCs. MDSCs also prevented the CsA-induced increase in fibronectin in microvascular and glomerular endothelial cells. Last, CsA dose-dependently reduced the number of MDSCs by inhibiting calcineurin and preventing cell proliferation, as other direct calcineurin signaling pathway inhibitors had the same dose-dependent effect. These data suggest that augmenting MDSCs can reduce the cardiovascular and renal toxicity and hypertension caused by CsA.
Prehypertension frequently progresses to hypertension, a condition associated with high morbidity and mortality from cardiovascular diseases and stroke. However, the risk factors for developing hypertension from prehypertension remain poorly understood. We conducted a retrospective cohort study using the data from 3584 prehypertensive Japanese adults (52.1±11.0 years, 2081 men) found to be prehypertensive in 2004 and reexamined in 2009. We calculated the cumulative incidences of hypertension over 5 years, examined risk factors, and calculated odds ratios (ORs) for developing hypertension after adjustments for age, sex, body mass index, smoking and drinking habits, baseline systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, chronic kidney disease, and serum uric acid levels. The additional analysis evaluated whether serum uric acid (hyperuricemia) constituted an independent risk factor for developing hypertension. The cumulative incidence of hypertension from prehypertension over 5 years was 25.3%. There were no significant differences between women and men (24.4% versus 26.0%; <i>P</i>=0.28). The cumulative incidence of hypertension in subjects with hyperuricemia (n=726) was significantly higher than those without hyperuricemia (n=2858; 30.7% versus 24.0%; <i>P</i><0.001). After multivariable adjustments, the risk factors for developing hypertension from prehypertension were age (OR, 1.023; <i>P</i><0.001), female sex (OR, 1.595; <i>P</i><0.001), higher body mass index (OR, 1.051; <i>P</i><0.001), higher baseline systolic (OR, 1.072; <i>P</i><0.001) and diastolic blood pressure (OR, 1.085; <i>P</i><0.001), and higher serum uric acid (OR, 1.149; <i>P</i><0.001). Increased serum uric acid is a strong risk marker for developing hypertension from prehypertension. Further studies are needed to determine whether treatment of hyperuricemia in prehypertensive subjects could impede the onset of hypertension.
Resistant hypertension, defined as blood pressure >140/90 mm Hg despite using ≥3 antihypertensive medications, is a well-recognized clinical entity. Patients with resistant hypertension are at an increased risk of cardiovascular disease compared with those with more easily controlled hypertension. Coronary heart disease mortality rates of younger adults are stagnating or on the rise. The purpose of our study was to characterize the phenotype and risk factors of younger patients with resistant hypertension, given the dearth of data on cardiovascular risk profile in this cohort. We conducted a cross-sectional analysis with predefined age groups of a large, ethnically diverse cohort of 2170 patients referred to the Hypertension Clinic at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Patients (n=2068) met the inclusion criteria and were classified by age groups, that is, ≤40 years (12.7% of total cohort), 41 to 55 years (32.1%), 56 to 70 years (36.1%), and ≥71 years (19.1%). Patients aged ≤40 years compared with those aged ≥71 years had significantly earlier onset of hypertension (24.7±7.4 versus 55.0±14.1 years; <i>P</i><0.0001), higher rates of obesity (53.4% versus 26.9%; <i>P</i><0.0001), and significantly higher levels of plasma aldosterone (11.3±9.8 versus 8.9±7.4 ng/dL; <i>P</i>=0.005), plasma renin activity (4.9±10.2 versus 2.5±5.0 ng/mL per hour; <i>P</i>=0.001), 24-hour urinary aldosterone (13.4±10.0 versus 8.2±6.2 µg/24 h; <i>P</i><0.0001), and sodium excretion (195.9±92.0 versus 146.8±67.1 mEq/24 h; <i>P</i><0.0001). Among patients with resistant hypertension, younger individuals have a distinct phenotype characterized by overlapping risk factors and comorbidities, including obesity, high aldosterone, and high dietary sodium intake compared with elderly.
The brain is highly susceptible to injury caused by hypertension because the increased blood pressure causes artery remodeling that can limit cerebral perfusion. Mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) antagonism prevents hypertensive cerebral artery remodeling, but the vascular cell types involved have not been defined. In the periphery, the endothelial MR mediates hypertension-induced vascular injury, but cerebral and peripheral arteries are anatomically distinct; thus, these findings cannot be extrapolated to the brain. The parenchymal arterioles determine cerebrovascular resistance. Determining the effects of hypertension and MR signaling on these arterioles could lead to a better understanding of cerebral small vessel disease. We hypothesized that endothelial MR signaling mediates inward cerebral artery remodeling and reduced cerebral perfusion during angiotensin II (AngII) hypertension. The biomechanics of the parenchymal arterioles and posterior cerebral arteries were studied in male C57Bl/6 and endothelial cell-specific MR knockout mice and their appropriate controls using pressure myography. AngII increased plasma aldosterone and decreased cerebral perfusion in C57Bl/6 and MR-intact littermates. Endothelial cell MR deletion improved cerebral perfusion in AngII-treated mice. AngII hypertension resulted in inward hypotrophic remodeling; this was prevented by MR antagonism and endothelial MR deletion. Our studies suggest that endothelial cell MR mediates hypertensive remodeling in the cerebral microcirculation and large pial arteries. AngII-induced inward remodeling of cerebral arteries and arterioles was associated with a reduction in cerebral perfusion that could worsen the outcome of stroke or contribute to vascular dementia.
Overall hypertension prevalence has not changed in the United States in recent decades although awareness, treatment, and control improved. However, hypertension epidemiology and its temporal trends may differ in younger adults compared with older adults. Our study included 41 331 participants ≥18 years of age from 8 National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (1999-2014) and estimated temporal trends of hypertension, awareness, treatment, and control among young adults (age, 18-39 years) compared with middle-age (age, 40-59 years) and older adults (age, ≥60 years). In 2013 to 2014, 7.3% of the US young adults had hypertension. During 1999 to 2014, young adults saw larger increases in hypertension awareness, treatment, and control than did older adults. However, all of these components of hypertension control were lower among young adults compared with middle-aged or older adults (74.7% younger versus 81.9% middle versus 88.4% older for awareness; 50.0% versus 70.3% versus 83.0% for treatment; and 40.2% versus 56.7% versus 54.4% for control). Worse hypertension awareness, treatment, and control in young adults overall were mostly driven by worse measures in young adult men compared with young adult women. More frequent healthcare visits by young adult women explained ≈28% of the sex-related difference in awareness, 60% of the difference in treatment, and 52% of the difference in control. These findings suggest that improved access to and engagement in medical care might improve hypertension control in young adults, particularly young adult men, and reduce life-time cardiovascular risk.
The DENERHTN trial (Renal Denervation for Hypertension) confirmed the blood pressure (BP) lowering efficacy of renal denervation added to a standardized stepped-care antihypertensive treatment for resistant hypertension at 6 months. We report here the effect of denervation on 24-hour BP and its variability and look for parameters that predicted the BP response. Patients with resistant hypertension were randomly assigned to denervation plus stepped-care treatment or treatment alone (control). Average and standard deviation of 24-hour, daytime, and nighttime BP and the smoothness index were calculated on recordings performed at randomization and 6 months. Responders were defined as a 6-month 24-hour systolic BP reduction ≥20 mm Hg. Analyses were performed on the per-protocol population. The significantly greater BP reduction in the denervation group was associated with a higher smoothness index (<i>P</i>=0.02). Variability of 24-hour, daytime, and nighttime BP did not change significantly from baseline to 6 months in both groups. The number of responders was greater in the denervation (20/44, 44.5%) than in the control group (11/53, 20.8%; <i>P</i>=0.01). In the discriminant analysis, baseline average nighttime systolic BP and standard deviation were significant predictors of the systolic BP response in the denervation group only, allowing adequate responder classification of 70% of the patients. Our results show that denervation lowers ambulatory BP homogeneously over 24 hours in patients with resistant hypertension and suggest that nighttime systolic BP and variability are predictors of the BP response to denervation.
URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT01570777.
Although shock wave lithotripsy is minimally invasive, earlier studies argued that it may increase patients' subsequent risk of hypertension and diabetes mellitus. This study evaluated the association between shock wave lithotripsy and new-onset hypertension or diabetes mellitus. The Taiwanese National Health Insurance Research Database was used to identify 20 219 patients aged 18 to 65 years who underwent the first stone surgical treatment (shock wave lithotripsy or ureterorenoscopic lithotripsy) between January 1999 and December 2011. A Cox proportional model was applied to evaluate associations. Time-varying Cox models were applied to evaluate the association between the number of shock wave lithotripsy sessions and the incidence of hypertension or diabetes mellitus. After a median follow-up of 74.9 and 82.6 months, 2028 and 688 patients developed hypertension in the shock wave lithotripsy and ureterorenoscopic lithotripsy groups, respectively. Patients who underwent shock wave lithotripsy had a higher probability of developing hypertension than patients who underwent ureterorenoscopic lithotripsy, with a hazard ratio of 1.20 (95% confidence interval, 1.10-1.31) after adjusting for covariates. The risk increased as the number of shock wave lithotripsy sessions increased. However, the diabetes mellitus risk was similar in the shock wave lithotripsy and ureterorenoscopic lithotripsy groups. Furthermore, the hazard ratio did not increase as the number of shock wave lithotripsy sessions increased. Shock wave lithotripsy consistently increased the incidence of hypertension on long-term follow-up. Therefore, alternatives to urolithiasis treatment (eg, endoscopic surgery or medical expulsion therapy) could avoid the hypertension risk. Furthermore, avoiding multiple sessions of shock wave lithotripsy could also evade the hypertension risk.
Although hyperuricemia and insulin resistance significantly correlated, their temporal sequence and how the sequence influence on future risk of hypertension are largely unknown. This study assessed temporal relationship between uric acid and insulin resistance and its impact on future risk of hypertension by examining a longitudinal cohort including 8543 subjects aged 20 to 74 years from China, with an average follow-up of 5.3 years. Measurements of fasting uric acid, as well as fasting and 2-hour serum glucose and insulin, were obtained at baseline and follow-up. Indicators of hepatic and peripheral insulin resistance were calculated. Cross-lagged panel and mediation analysis were used to examine the temporal relationship between uric acid and insulin resistance and its impact on follow-up hypertension. After adjusting for covariates, the cross-lagged path coefficients (<i>β</i><sub>1</sub> values) from baseline uric acid to follow-up insulin resistance indices were significantly greater than path coefficients (<i>β</i><sub>2</sub> values) from baseline insulin resistance indices to follow-up uric acid (<i>β</i><sub>1</sub>=0.110 versus <i>β</i><sub>2</sub>=0.017; <i>P</i><0.001, for hepatic insulin resistance; <i>β</i><sub>1</sub>=-0.208 versus <i>β</i><sub>2</sub>=-0.021; <i>P</i><0.001, for peripheral insulin resistance). The path coefficients from baseline uric acid to follow-up insulin resistance indices in the hypertensive group were significantly greater than that in the normotensive group (<i>P</i><0.001 for the difference of <i>β</i><sub>1</sub> values in the 2 groups). Insulin resistance partially mediated the effect of uric acid on subsequent hypertension, and the mediation effect of peripheral insulin resistance was significantly greater than that of hepatic insulin resistance (31.3% versus 13.2%; <i>P</i><0.001, for the difference of mediation effects). These findings provide evidence that higher uric acid levels probably precede insulin resistance, and peripheral insulin resistance likely plays a more important role in the development of hypertension than hepatic insulin resistance does.
Dietary intake is pointed as one of the major determinants in hypertension development. Data in the area are mostly obtained from cross-sectional studies. We aimed to investigate the prospective association between (1) individual nutritional factors and (2) adherence to the Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension and the risk of incident hypertension in a large cohort study. We prospectively examined the incidence of hypertension among 80 426 French adults participating in the NutriNet-Santé cohort study. Self-reported sociodemographic, lifestyle health questionnaires and dietary consumption assessed by three 24-hour records were completed at baseline and yearly thereafter. Associations between quartiles (Q) of nutrients and food groups and adherence to Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension diet and hypertension risk were assessed by multivariable Cox proportional hazards models. During a mean follow-up of 3.4±2.1 years, 2413 cases of incident hypertension were documented. Dietary intakes of sodium (Q4 versus Q1): hazard ratio (HR)=1.17 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.02-1.35), potassium: HR=0.82 (95% CI, 0.72-0.94), animal protein: HR=1.26 (95% CI, 1.11-1.43), vegetable protein: HR=0.85 (95% CI, 0.75-0.95), fiber: HR =0.81 (95% CI, 0.71-0.93), magnesium: HR=0.77 (95% CI, 0.67-0.89), fruit and vegetables: HR=0.85 (95% CI, 0.74-0.97), whole grain: HR=0.84(95% CI, 0.76-0.93), nuts: HR=0.72 (95% CI, 0.63-0.83), and red and processed meat: HR=1.25 (95% CI, 1.11-0.42) were associated with risk of hypertension. Besides, adherence to the Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension was strongly inversely associated with incident hypertension: (Q4 versus Q1) HR=0.66 (95% CI, 0.58-0.75). Our results confirmed the association of several nutritional factors intake and incident hypertension and highlighted that adopting a global healthy diet could strongly contribute to the prevention of hypertension.
Subclinical kidney disease is associated with developing hypertension in the general population, but data are lacking among HIV-infected people. We examined associations of kidney function and injury with incident hypertension in 823 HIV-infected and 267 HIV-uninfected women in the Women's Interagency HIV Study, a multicenter, prospective cohort of HIV-infected and uninfected women in the United States. Baseline kidney biomarkers included estimated glomerular filtration rate using cystatin C, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio, and 7 urine biomarkers of tubular injury: α-1-microglobulin, interleukin-18, kidney injury molecule-1, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, liver fatty acid-binding protein, N-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase, and α1-acid-glycoprotein. We used multivariable Poisson regression to evaluate associations of kidney biomarkers with incident hypertension, defined as 2 consecutive visits of antihypertensive medication use. During a median follow-up of 9.6 years, 288 HIV-infected women (35%) developed hypertension. Among the HIV-infected women, higher urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio was independently associated with incident hypertension (relative risk =1.13 per urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio doubling, 95% confidence interval, 1.07-1.20), as was lower estimated glomerular filtration rate (relative risk =1.10 per 10 mL/min/1.73 m<sup>2</sup> lower estimated glomerular filtration rate; 95% confidence interval, 1.04-1.17). No tubular injury and dysfunction biomarkers were independently associated with incident hypertension in HIV-infected women. In contrast, among the HIV-uninfected women, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio was not associated with incident hypertension, whereas higher urine interleukin-18, α1-acid-glycoprotein, and N-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase levels were significantly associated with incident hypertension. These findings suggest that early glomerular injury and kidney dysfunction may be involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension in HIV-infected people. The associations of tubular markers with hypertension in HIV-uninfected women should be validated in other studies.
Several modifiable health behaviors and health factors that comprise the Life's Simple 7-a cardiovascular health metric-have been associated with hypertension risk. We determined the association between cardiovascular health and incident hypertension in JHS (the Jackson Heart Study)-a cohort of blacks. We analyzed participants without hypertension or cardiovascular disease at baseline (2000-2004) who attended ≥1 follow-up visit in 2005 to 2008 or 2009 to 2012 (n=1878). Body mass index, physical activity, diet, cigarette smoking, blood pressure (BP), total cholesterol, and fasting glucose were assessed at baseline and categorized as ideal, intermediate, or poor using the American Heart Association's Life's Simple 7 definitions. Incident hypertension was defined at the first visit wherein a participant had systolic BP ≥140 mm Hg, diastolic BP ≥90 mm Hg, or self-reported taking antihypertensive medication. The percentage of participants with ≤1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 ideal Life's Simple 7 components was 6.5%, 22.4%, 34.4%, 25.2%, 10.0%, and 1.4%, respectively. No participants had 7 ideal components. During follow-up (median, 8.0 years), 944 (50.3%) participants developed hypertension, including 81.3% with ≤1 and 11.1% with 6 ideal components. The multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence interval) for incident hypertension comparing participants with 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 versus ≤1 ideal component were 0.80 (0.61-1.03), 0.58 (0.45-0.74), 0.30 (0.23-0.40), 0.26 (0.18-0.37), and 0.10 (0.03-0.31), respectively (<i>P</i>trend <0.001). This association was present among participants with baseline systolic BP <120 mm Hg and diastolic BP <80 mm Hg and separately systolic BP 120 to 139 mm Hg or diastolic BP 80 to 89 mm Hg. Blacks with better cardiovascular health have lower hypertension risk.
The immunosuppressive calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine A and tacrolimus alter T-cell subsets and can cause hypertension, vascular dysfunction, and renal toxicity. We and others have reported that cyclosporine A and tacrolimus decrease anti-inflammatory regulatory T cells and increase proinflammatory interleukin-17-producing T cells; therefore, we hypothesized that inhibition of these effects using noncellular therapies would prevent the hypertension, endothelial dysfunction, and renal glomerular injury induced by calcineurin inhibitor therapy. Daily treatment of mice with cyclosporine A or tacrolimus for 1 week significantly decreased CD4<sup>+</sup>/FoxP3<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells in the spleen and lymph nodes, as well as induced hypertension, vascular injury and dysfunction, and glomerular mesangial expansion in mice. Daily cotreatment with all-trans retinoic acid reported to increase regulatory T cells and decrease interleukin-17-producing T cells, prevented all of the detrimental effects of cyclosporine A and tacrolimus. All-trans retinoic acid also increased regulatory T cells and prevented the hypertension, endothelial dysfunction, and glomerular injury in genetically modified mice that phenocopy calcineurin inhibitor-treated mice (FKBP12-Tie2 knockout). Treatment with an interleukin-17-neutralizing antibody also increased regulatory T-cell levels and prevented the hypertension, endothelial dysfunction, and glomerular injury in cyclosporine A-treated and tacrolimus-treated mice and FKBP12-Tie2 knockout mice, whereas an isotype control had no effect. Augmenting regulatory T cells and inhibiting interleukin-17 signaling using noncellular therapies prevents the cardiovascular and renal toxicity of calcineurin inhibitors in mice.
An altered hormonal or chronic systemic inflammatory milieu characterizing endometriosis may result in a higher risk of hypercholesterolemia and hypertension. Conversely, elevated low-density lipoprotein in hypercholesterolemia and chronic systemic inflammation resulting from hypertension may increase the risk of endometriosis. We assessed the association of laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis with hypercholesterolemia and hypertension in a large prospective cohort study. In 1989, 116 430 registered female nurses aged 25 to 42 completed the baseline questionnaire and were followed for 20 years. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models were applied. In 1989, there were 4244 women with laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis and 91 554 women without. After adjusting for demographic, anthropometric, family history, reproductive, dietary, and lifestyle risk factors prospectively, comparing women with laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis to women without, the relative risks were 1.25 (95% confidence interval, 1.21-1.30) for development of hypercholesterolemia and 1.14 (95% confidence interval, 1.09-1.18) for hypertension. Conversely, the relative risks of developing laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis were 1.22 (95% confidence interval, 1.15-1.31) comparing women with hypercholesterolemia to women without and 1.29 (95% confidence interval, 1.18-1.41) comparing women with hypertension to women without. The strength of associations of laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis with hypercholesterolemia or hypertension was strongest among women aged ≤40 and weakened as age increased (<i>P</i> values for interaction <0.001). We observed that ≈45% of the associations between endometriosis and hypercholesterolemia and hypertension could be accounted for by treatment factors after endometriosis diagnosis, including greater frequency of hysterectomy/oophorectomy and earlier age for this surgery. In this large cohort study, laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis was prospectively associated with increased risk of hypercholesterolemia and hypertension. Conversely, hypercholesterolemia and hypertension were prospectively associated with higher risk of laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis.
The aim of this study was to assess characteristic impedance (Z<sub>c</sub>) of the proximal aorta in young and middle-aged individuals with isolated systolic hypertension (ISH). Z<sub>c</sub> is an index of aortic stiffness relative to aortic size. In the Dallas Heart Study, 2001 untreated participants 18 to 64 years of age (mean age: 42.3 years; 44% black race) were divided into the following groups based on office blood pressure (BP) measurements: (1) optimal BP (systolic BP [SBP] <120 mm Hg and diastolic BP [DBP] <80 mm Hg; n=837); (2) prehypertension (SBP 120-139 mm Hg and DBP 80-89 mm Hg; n=821); (3) ISH (SBP ≥140 mm Hg and DBP <90 mm Hg; n=121); (4) isolated diastolic hypertension (SBP <140 mm Hg and DBP ≥90 mm Hg; n=44); and (5) systolic-diastolic hypertension (SBP ≥140 mm Hg and DBP ≥90 mm Hg; n=178). Z<sub>c</sub>, aortic arch pulse wave velocity, and minimum ascending aortic size were quantified using cardiovascular magnetic resonance. In multivariable-adjusted linear models, Z<sub>c</sub> was highest in the ISH group compared with the optimal BP, isolated diastolic hypertension, or systolic-diastolic hypertension groups (103.2±4.0 versus 68.3±2.1, 75.4±6.0, and 88.9±4.8 dyne*seconds/cm<sup>5</sup>, respectively; all <i>P</i><0.05). The Z<sub>c</sub>-ISH association did not differ by race. Aortic pulse wave velocity was highest in the ISH group compared with the optimal BP, isolated diastolic hypertension, or systolic-diastolic hypertension groups (6.3±0.3 versus 4.3±0.1, 4.4±0.4 and 5.5±0.3 m/s, respectively; all <i>P</i><0.05), whereas aortic size was similar across groups (all <i>P</i>>0.2). Results were similar in a subgroup of 1551 participants 18 to 49 years of age. In a multiracial population-based sample, we found evidence of a mismatch between proximal aortic stiffness and diameter in young and middle-aged adults with ISH.
Hypertension is an atherosclerosis factor and is associated with cardiovascular risk. We investigated the relationship between hypertension and the presence, extent, and severity of coronary atherosclerosis in coronary computed tomographic angiography and cardiac events risk. Of 17 181 patients enrolled in the CONFIRM registry (Coronary CT Angiography Evaluation for Clinical Outcomes: An International Multicenter Registry) who underwent ≥64-detector row coronary computed tomographic angiography, we identified 14 803 patients without known coronary artery disease. Of these, 1434 hypertensive patients were matched to 1434 patients without hypertension. Major adverse cardiac events risk of hypertension and non-hypertensive patients was evaluated with Cox proportional hazards models. The prognostic associations between hypertension and no-hypertension with increasing degree of coronary stenosis severity (nonobstructive or obstructive ≥50%) and extent of coronary artery disease (segment involvement score of 1-5, >5) was also assessed. Hypertension patients less commonly had no coronary atherosclerosis and more commonly had nonobstructive and 1-, 2-, and 3-vessel disease than the no-hypertension group. During a mean follow-up of 5.2±1.2 years, 180 patients experienced cardiac events, with 104 (2.0%) occurring in the hypertension group and 76 (1.5%) occurring in the no-hypertension group (hazard ratios, 1.4; 95% confidence intervals, 1.0-1.9). Compared with no-hypertension patients without coronary atherosclerosis, hypertension patients with no coronary atherosclerosis and obstructive coronary disease tended to have higher risk of cardiac events. Similar trends were observed with respect to extent of coronary artery disease. Compared with no-hypertension patients, hypertensive patients have increased presence, extent, and severity of coronary atherosclerosis and tend to have an increase in major adverse cardiac events.
Genome-wide analysis of renal sodium-transporting system has identified specific variations of Mendelian hypertensive disorders, including <i>HSD11B2</i> gene variants in apparent mineralocorticoid excess. However, these genetic variations in extrarenal tissue can be involved in developing hypertension, as demonstrated in former studies using global and brain-specific <i>Hsd11b2</i> knockout rodents. To re-examine the importance of renal dysfunction on developing hypertension, we generated kidney-specific <i>Hsd11b2</i> knockout mice. The knockout mice exhibited systemic hypertension, which was abolished by reducing salt intake, suggesting its salt-dependency. In addition, we detected an increase in renal membrane expressions of cleaved epithelial sodium channel-α and T53-phosphorylated Na<sup>+</sup>-Cl<sup>-</sup> cotransporter in the knockout mice. Acute intraperitoneal administration of amiloride-induced natriuresis and increased urinary sodium/potassium ratio more in the knockout mice compared with those in the wild-type control mice. Chronic administration of amiloride and high-KCl diet significantly decreased mean blood pressure in the knockout mice, which was accompanied with the correction of hypokalemia and the resultant decrease in Na<sup>+</sup>-Cl<sup>-</sup> cotransporter phosphorylation. Accordingly, a Na<sup>+</sup>-Cl<sup>-</sup> cotransporter blocker hydrochlorothiazide significantly decreased mean blood pressure in the knockout mice. Chronic administration of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist spironolactone significantly decreased mean blood pressure of the knockout mice along with downregulation of cleaved epithelial sodium channel-α and phosphorylated Na<sup>+</sup>-Cl<sup>-</sup> cotransporter expression in the knockout kidney. Our data suggest that kidney-specific deficiency of 11β-HSD2 leads to salt-dependent hypertension, which is attributed to mineralocorticoid receptor-epithelial sodium channel-Na<sup>+</sup>-Cl<sup>-</sup> cotransporter activation in the kidney, and provides evidence that renal dysfunction is essential for developing the phenotype of apparent mineralocorticoid excess.
This study aims to characterize longitudinal blood pressure (BP) trajectories from childhood in black-white and sex groups and examine the association between childhood level-independent trajectories of BP and adult hypertension. The longitudinal cohort consisted of 2732 adults who had body mass index and BP measured 4 to 15 times from childhood (4-19 years) to adulthood (20-51 years). Model-estimated levels and linear slopes of BP and body mass index at childhood age points were calculated at 1-year intervals using the growth curve parameters and their first derivatives, respectively. Linear and nonlinear curve parameters differed significantly between race-sex groups; BP levels showed race and sex differences 15 years of age onward. Hypertensives had higher long-term BP levels than normotensives in race-sex groups. Although linear and nonlinear slope parameters of BP were race and sex specific, they differed consistently, significantly between hypertension and normotension groups. BP trajectories during young adulthood (20-35 years) were significantly greater in hypertensives than in normotensives; however, the trajectories during middle-aged adulthood (36-51 years) were significantly smaller in hypertensives than in normotensives. Level-independent linear slopes of systolic BP showed significantly negative associations (odds ratio=0.50≈0.76; <i>P</i><0.001) during prepuberty period (4-11 years) but significantly positive associations (odd ratio=1.44≈2.80, <i>P</i><0.001) during the puberty period (13-19 years) with adult hypertension, adjusting for covariates. These associations were consistent across race-sex groups. These observations indicate that adult hypertension originates in childhood, with different longitudinal BP trajectory profiles during young and middle-aged adulthood in black-white and sex groups. Puberty is a crucial period for the development of hypertension in later life.
Low vitamin D and K status are both associated with an increased cardiovascular risk. New evidence from experimental studies on bone health suggest an interaction between vitamin D and K; however, a joint association with vascular health outcomes is largely unknown. To prospectively investigate whether the combination of low vitamin D and K status is associated with higher systolic and diastolic blood pressure in 402 participants and with incident hypertension in 231 participants free of hypertension at baseline. We used data from a subsample of the Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam, a population-based cohort of Dutch participants aged 55 to 65 years. Vitamin D and K status were assessed by 25-hydroxyvitamin D and dp-ucMGP (dephosphorylated uncarboxylated matrix gla protein) concentrations (high dp-ucMGP is indicative for low vitamin K status) in stored samples from 2002 to 2003. Vitamin D and K status were categorized into 25-hydroxyvitamin D <50/≥50 mmol/L and median dp-ucMGP <323/≥323 pmol/L. During a median follow-up of 6.4 years, 62% of the participants (n=143) developed hypertension. The combination of low vitamin D and K status was associated with increased systolic 4.8 mm Hg (95% confidence interval, 0.1-9.5) and diastolic 3.1 mm Hg (95% confidence interval, 0.5-5.7) blood pressure compared with high vitamin D and K status (<i>P</i> for interaction =0.013 for systolic blood pressure and 0.068 for diastolic blood pressure). A similar trend was seen for incident hypertension: hazard ratio=1.62 (95% confidence interval, 0.96-2.73) for the low vitamin D and K group. The combination of low vitamin D and K status was associated with increased blood pressure and a trend for greater hypertension risk.
Cytochrome P450 1B1 protects against angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced hypertension and associated cardiovascular changes in female mice, most likely via production of 2-methoxyestradiol. This study was conducted to determine whether 2-methoxyestradiol ameliorates Ang II-induced hypertension, renal dysfunction, and end-organ damage in intact <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>-/-</sup>, ovariectomized female, and <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> male mice. Ang II or vehicle was infused for 2 weeks and administered concurrently with 2-methoxyestradiol. Mice were placed in metabolic cages on day 12 of Ang II infusion for urine collection for 24 hours. 2-Methoxyestradiol reduced Ang II-induced increases in systolic blood pressure, water consumption, urine output, and proteinuria in intact female <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>-/-</sup> and ovariectomized mice. 2-Methoxyestradiol also reduced Ang II-induced increase in blood pressure, water intake, urine output, and proteinuria in <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> male mice. Treatment with 2-methoxyestradiol attenuated Ang II-induced end-organ damage in intact <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>-/-</sup> and ovariectomized <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> and <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>-/-</sup> female mice and <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> male mice. 2-Methoxyestradiol mitigated Ang II-induced increase in urinary excretion of angiotensinogen in intact <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>-/-</sup> and ovariectomized <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> and <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>-/-</sup> female mice but not in <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> male mice. The G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 antagonist G-15 failed to alter Ang II-induced increases in blood pressure and renal function in <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> female mice. These data suggest that 2-methoxyestradiol reduces Ang II-induced hypertension and associated end-organ damage in intact <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>-/-</sup>, ovariectomized <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> and <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>-/-</sup> female mice, and <i>Cyp1b1</i><sup>+/+</sup> male mice independent of G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1. Therefore, 2-methoxyestradiol could serve as a therapeutic agent for treating hypertension and associated pathogenesis in postmenopausal females, and in males.
Despite the inverse association between physical activity (PA) and incident hypertension, a comprehensive assessment of the quantitative dose-response association between PA and hypertension has not been reported. We performed a meta-analysis, including dose-response analysis, to quantitatively evaluate this association. We searched PubMed and Embase databases for articles published up to November 1, 2016. Random effects generalized least squares regression models were used to assess the quantitative association between PA and hypertension risk across studies. Restricted cubic splines were used to model the dose-response association. We identified 22 articles (29 studies) investigating the risk of hypertension with leisure-time PA or total PA, including 330 222 individuals and 67 698 incident cases of hypertension. The risk of hypertension was reduced by 6% (relative risk, 0.94; 95% confidence interval, 0.92-0.96) with each 10 metabolic equivalent of task h/wk increment of leisure-time PA. We found no evidence of a nonlinear dose-response association of PA and hypertension (<i>P</i><sub>nonlinearity</sub>=0.094 for leisure-time PA and 0.771 for total PA). With the linear cubic spline model, when compared with inactive individuals, for those who met the guidelines recommended minimum level of moderate PA (10 metabolic equivalent of task h/wk), the risk of hypertension was reduced by 6% (relative risk, 0.94; 95% confidence interval, 0.92-0.97). This meta-analysis suggests that additional benefits for hypertension prevention occur as the amount of PA increases.
Whether age at first childbirth has an effect on hypertension incidence is unclear. The objectives of this study were to examine the relationship between age at first childbirth and hypertension and to examine whether degree of obesity, measured as body mass index, mediates age at first childbirth-related hypertension in postmenopausal women. This study analyzed 4779 postmenopausal women data from the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2010 to 2012. Logistic regression analyses were used to investigate relationship between age at first childbirth and hypertension. Mediation analysis was performed to examine the contribution of body mass index to age at first childbirth-related hypertension. Mean of participants' age at first childbirth and current age were 23.8 and 63.4 years, respectively. The prevalence of hypertension was 51.1%. Age at first childbirth was significantly associated with the prevalence of hypertension (odds ratio, 0.963; 95% confidence interval, 0.930-0.998; <i>P</i>=0.036). Women with age at first childbirth ≤19 years had significantly higher risk of hypertension (odds ratio, 1.61; 95% confidence interval, 1.17-2.23; <i>P</i>=0.004) compared with those >19 years. Multivariable-adjusted prevalence of hypertension was significantly lower in women who delivered the first infant at 20 to 24 (45.5%), 25 to 29 (46.1%), and ≥30 (39.9%) years compared with those at ≤19 years (58.4%). Body mass index completely mediated age at first childbirth-hypertension relationship (indirect effect: odds ratio, 0.992; 95% confidence interval, 0.987-0.998; <i>P</i>=0.008). Age at first childbirth was significantly associated with hypertension in postmenopausal women. Body mass index mediated the effects of age at first childbirth on hypertension.
Increased ectopic adipose tissue infiltration in skeletal muscle is associated with insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus. We evaluated whether change in skeletal muscle adiposity predicts subsequent development of hypertension in men of African ancestry, a population sample understudied in previous studies. In the Tobago Health Study, a prospective longitudinal study among men of African ancestry (age range 40-91 years), calf intermuscular adipose tissue, and skeletal muscle attenuation were measured with computed tomography. Hypertension was defined as a systolic blood pressure ≥140 mm Hg, or a diastolic blood pressure ≥90 mm Hg, or receiving antihypertensive medications. Logistic regression was performed with adjustment for age, insulin resistance, baseline and 6-year change in body mass index, baseline and 6-year change in waist circumference, and other potential confounding factors. Among 746 normotensive men at baseline, 321 (43%) developed hypertension during the mean 6.2 years of follow-up. Decreased skeletal muscle attenuation was associated with newly developed hypertension after adjustment for baseline and 6-year change of body mass index (odds ratio [95% confidence interval] per SD, 1.3 [1.0-1.6]) or baseline and 6-year change of waist circumference (odds ratio [95% confidence interval] per SD, 1.3 [1.0-1.6]). No association was observed between increased intermuscular adipose tissue and hypertension. Our novel findings show that decreased muscle attenuation is associated with newly developed hypertension among men of African ancestry, independent of general and central adiposity and insulin resistance. Further studies are needed to adjust for inflammation, visceral and other ectopic adipose tissue depots, and to confirm our findings in other population samples.
Successful control of blood pressure relies on identification of secondary causes and contributing factors of hypertension. As antihypertensive medication can interfere with diagnostic investigations, temporary discontinuation of medication is advised. However, there are concerns about the safety of temporary discontinuation of antihypertensive medication in patients with difficult-to-control hypertension. We assessed the occurrence of adverse cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events potentially attributable to temporary discontinuation of antihypertensive medication between February 2010 and March 2016 (n=604) in our Analysis of Complicated Hypertension screening program. A reference group (n=604) was extracted from the SMART study (Second Manifestations of Arterial Disease) cohort (comprising a similar cohort at our hospital in whom medication was not stopped) and individually matched for blood pressure, age, sex, and history of cardiovascular disease. Discontinuation of medication was well tolerated; 62% reported no complaints, 24% had mild discomfort that could be left untreated, and 14% experienced complaints that required prescription of antihypertensive escape medication. Three major adverse events were observed in the Analysis of Complicated Hypertension group between discontinuation of medication and 30 days after restart of medication (event rate=31.2 events per 1000 patient-year). In the reference cohort, 5 cardiovascular events were observed during a similar follow-up period (event rate=51.2 events per 1000 patient-year). In conclusion, discontinuation of antihypertensive medication for the diagnostic evaluation of hypertension does not increase the acute risk of cardiovascular events when performed in a well-controlled setting in specialized hospitals with appropriate protocols for monitoring safety.
Hypertension is associated with increased activity of the kallikrein-kinin system. Kinin B1 receptor (B1R) activation leads to vasoconstriction and inflammation. Despite evidence supporting a role for the B1R in blood pressure regulation, the mechanisms by which B1R could alter autonomic function and participate in the pathogenesis of hypertension remain unidentified. We sought to explore whether B1R-mediated inflammation contributes to hypertension and investigate the molecular mechanisms involved. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that activation of B1R in the brain is involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension, using the deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt model of neurogenic hypertension in wild-type and B1R knockout mice. Deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt treatment in wild-type mice led to significant increases in B1R mRNA and protein levels and bradykinin levels, enhanced gene expression of carboxypeptidase N supporting an increase in the B1R ligand, associated with enhanced blood pressure, inflammation, sympathoexcitation, autonomic dysfunction, and impaired baroreflex sensitivity, whereas these changes were blunted or prevented in B1R knockout mice. B1R stimulation was further shown to involve activation of the ASK1-JNK-ERK1/2 and NF-κB pathways in the brain. To dismiss potential developmental alterations in knockout mice, we further used B1R blockade selectively in the brain of wild-type mice. Supporting the central origin of this mechanism, intracerebroventricular infusion of a specific B1R antagonist, attenuated the deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt-induced increase in blood pressure in wild-type mice. Our data provide the first evidence of a central role for B1R-mediated inflammatory pathways in the pathogenesis of deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt hypertension and offer novel insights into possible B1R-targeted therapies for the treatment of neurogenic hypertension.
Long-term exposure to ambient fine particulate pollution (PM<sub>2.5</sub>) has been associated with cardiovascular diseases. Hypertension, a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases, has also been hypothesized to be linked to PM<sub>2.5</sub> However, epidemiological evidence has been mixed. We examined long-term association between ambient PM<sub>2.5</sub> and hypertension and blood pressure. We interviewed 12 665 participants aged 50 years and older and measured their blood pressures. Annual average PM<sub>2.5</sub> concentrations were estimated for each community using satellite data. We applied 2-level logistic regression models to examine the associations and estimated hypertension burden attributable to ambient PM<sub>2.5</sub> For each 10 μg/m<sup>3</sup> increase in ambient PM<sub>2.5</sub>, the adjusted odds ratio of hypertension was 1.14 (95% confidence interval, 1.07-1.22). Stratified analyses found that overweight and obesity could enhance the association, and consumption of fruit was associated with lower risk. We further estimated that 11.75% (95% confidence interval, 5.82%-18.53%) of the hypertension cases (corresponding to 914, 95% confidence interval, 453-1442 cases) could be attributable to ambient PM<sub>2.5</sub> in the study population. Findings suggest that long-term exposure to ambient PM<sub>2.5</sub> might be an important risk factor of hypertension and is responsible for significant hypertension burden in adults in China. A higher consumption of fruit may mitigate, whereas overweight and obesity could enhance this effect.
Prospective studies indicate that hyperaldosteronism is found in 20% of patients with resistant hypertension. A small number of observational studies in normotensive and hypertensive patients suggest a correlation between aldosterone levels and obesity while others could not confirm these findings. The correlation between aldosterone levels and body mass index (BMI) in patients with resistant hypertension has not been previously investigated. Our objective was to determine whether BMI is positively correlated with plasma aldosterone concentration, plasma renin activity, aldosterone:renin ratio, and 24-hour urinary aldosterone in black and white patients. We performed a cross-sectional analysis of a large diverse cohort (n=2170) with resistant hypertension. The relationship between plasma aldosterone concentration, plasma renin activity, aldosterone:renin ratio, 24-hour urinary aldosterone, and BMI was investigated for the entire cohort, by sex and race (65.3% white, 40.3% men). We demonstrate that plasma aldosterone concentration and aldosterone:renin ratio were significantly correlated to BMI (P<0.0001) across the first 3 quartiles, but not from the 3rd to 4th quartile of BMI. Plasma renin activity was not correlated with BMI. Twenty-four-hour urinary aldosterone was positively correlated across all quartiles of BMI for the cohort (P<0.0001) and when analyzed by sex (men P<0.0001; women P=0.0013) and race (P<0.05), and stronger for men compared with women (r=0.19, P<0.001 versus r=0.05, P=0.431, P=0.028) regardless of race. In both black and white patients, aldosterone levels were positively correlated to increasing BMI, with the correlation being more pronounced in black and white men. These findings suggest that obesity, particularly the abdominal obesity typical of men, contributes to excess aldosterone in patients with resistant hypertension.
Systemic arterial hypertension predisposes children to cardiovascular risk in childhood and adult life. Despite extensive study of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, detailed 3-dimensional strain analysis of cardiac function in hypertensive children has not been reported. The aim of this study was to evaluate LV mechanics (strain, twist, and torsion) in young patients with hypertension compared with a healthy control group and assess factors associated with functional measurements. Sixty-three patients (26 hypertension and 37 normotensive) were enrolled (mean age, 14.3 and 11.4 years; 54% men and 41% men, respectively). All children underwent clinical evaluation and echocardiographic examination, including 3-dimensional strain. There was no difference in LV volumes and ejection fraction between the groups. Myocardial deformation was significantly reduced in those with hypertension compared with controls. For hypertensive and normotensive groups, respectively, global longitudinal strain was -15.1±2.3 versus -18.5±1.9 (<i>P</i><0.0001), global circumferential strain -15.2±3 versus -19.9±3.1 (<0.0001), global radial strain +44.0±11.3 versus 63.4±10.5 (<i>P</i><0.0001), and global 3-dimensional strain -26.1±3.8 versus -31.5±3.8 (<i>P</i><0.0001). Basal clockwise rotation, apical counterclockwise rotation, twist, and torsion were not significantly different. After multivariate regression analyses blood pressure, body mass index and LV mass maintained a significant relationship with measures of LV strain. Similar ventricular volumes and ejection fraction were observed in hypertensive and normotensive children, but children with hypertension had significantly lower strain indices. Whether reduced strain might predict future cardiovascular risk merits further longitudinal study.
Numerous findings demonstrate that there is a strong association between maternal health during pregnancy and cardiovascular disease in adult offspring. The purpose of the present study was to test whether maternal gestational hypertension modulates brain renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and proinflammatory cytokines that sensitizes angiotensin II-elicited hypertensive response in adult offspring. In addition, the role of renal nerves and the RAAS in the sensitization process was investigated. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analyses of structures of the lamina terminalis and paraventricular nucleus indicated upregulation of mRNA expression of several RAAS components and proinflammatory cytokines in 10-week-old male offspring of hypertensive dams. Most of these increases were significantly inhibited by either renal denervation performed at 8 weeks of age or treatment with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, captopril, in drinking water starting at weaning. When tested beginning at 10 weeks of age, a pressor dose of angiotensin II resulted in enhanced upregulation of mRNA expression of RAAS components and proinflammatory cytokines in the lamina terminalis and paraventricular nucleus and an augmented pressor response in male offspring of hypertensive dams. The augmented blood pressure change and most of the increases in gene expression in the offspring were abolished by either renal denervation or captopril. The results suggest that maternal hypertension during pregnancy enhances pressor responses to angiotensin II through overactivity of renal nerves and the RAAS in male offspring and that upregulation of the brain RAAS and proinflammatory cytokines in these offspring may contribute to maternal gestational hypertension-induced sensitization of the hypertensive response to angiotensin II.
Systolic blood pressure (SBP) treatment targets for adults with diabetes mellitus remain unclear. SBP levels among 12 275 adults with diabetes mellitus, prior cardiovascular disease, and treated hypertension were evaluated in the TECOS (Trial Evaluating Cardiovascular Outcomes With Sitagliptin) randomized trial of sitagliptin versus placebo. The association between baseline SBP and recurrent cardiovascular disease was evaluated using multivariable Cox proportional hazards modeling with restricted cubic splines, adjusting for clinical characteristics. Kaplan-Meier curves by baseline SBP were created to assess time to cardiovascular disease and 2 potential hypotension-related adverse events: worsening kidney function and fractures. The association between time-updated SBP and outcomes was examined using multivariable Cox proportional hazards models. Overall, 42.2% of adults with diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, and hypertension had an SBP ≥140 mm Hg. The association between SBP and cardiovascular disease risk was U shaped, with a nadir ≈130 mm Hg. When the analysis was restricted to those with baseline SBP of 110 to 150 mm Hg, the adjusted association between SBP and cardiovascular disease risk was flat (hazard ratio per 10-mm Hg increase, 0.96; 95% confidence interval, 0.91-1.02). There was no association between SBP and risk of fracture. Above 150 mm Hg, higher SBP was associated with increasing risk of worsening kidney function (hazard ratio per 10-mm Hg increase, 1.10; 95% confidence interval, 1.02-1.18). Many patients with diabetes mellitus have uncontrolled hypertension. The U-shaped association between SBP and cardiovascular disease events was largely driven by those with very high or low SBP, with no difference in cardiovascular disease risk between 110 and 150 mm Hg. Lower SBP was not associated with higher risks of fractures or worsening kidney function.
Prehypertension and hypertension in childhood are defined by sex-, age-, and height-specific 90th (or ≥120/80 mm Hg) and 95th percentiles of blood pressure, respectively, by the 2004 Fourth Report. However, these cutoffs are complex and cumbersome for use. This study assessed the performance of a simplified blood pressure definition to predict adult hypertension and subclinical cardiovascular disease. The cohort consisted of 1225 adults (530 men; aged 26.3-47.7 years) from the Bogalusa Heart Study with 27.1-year follow-up since childhood. We used 110/70 and 120/80 mm Hg for children (age, 6-11 years), and 120/80 and 130/85 mm Hg for adolescents (age, 12-17 years) as the simplified definition of childhood prehypertension and hypertension, respectively, to compare with the 2004 Fourth Report (the complex definition). Adult carotid intima-media thickness, pulse wave velocity, and left ventricular mass were measured using digital ultrasound instruments. Compared with normal blood pressure, childhood hypertensives diagnosed by the simplified definition and the complex definition were both at higher risk of adult hypertension with hazard ratio of 3.1 (95% confidence interval, 1.8-5.3) by the simplified definition and 3.2 (2.0-5.0) by the complex definition, high pulse wave velocity with 3.5 (1.7-7.1) and 2.2 (1.2-4.1), high carotid intima-media thickness with 3.1 (1.7-5.6) and 2.0 (1.2-3.6), and left ventricular hypertrophy with 3.4 (1.7-6.8) and 3.0 (1.6-5.6). The results were confirmed by reclassification or receiver operating curve analyses. The simplified childhood blood pressure definition predicts the risk of adult hypertension and subclinical cardiovascular disease equally as the complex definition does, which could be useful for screening hypertensive children to reduce risk of adult cardiovascular disease.
There is limited empirical evidence to support the protective effects of physical activity in the prevention of hypertension among African Americans. The purpose of this study was to examine the association of physical activity with incident hypertension among African Americans. We studied 1311 participants without hypertension at baseline enrolled in the Jackson Heart Study, a community-based study of African Americans residing in Jackson, Mississippi. Overall physical activity, moderate-vigorous physical activity, and domain-specific physical activity (work, active living, household, and sport/exercise) were assessed by self-report during the baseline examination (2000-2004). Incident hypertension, assessed at examination 2 (2005-2008) and examination 3 (2009-2013), was defined as the first visit with systolic/diastolic blood pressure ≥140/90 mm Hg or self-reported antihypertensive medication use. Over a median follow-up of 8.0 years, there were 650 (49.6%) incident hypertension cases. The multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence interval) for incident hypertension comparing participants with intermediate and ideal versus poor levels of moderate-vigorous physical activity were 0.84 (0.67-1.05) and 0.76 (0.58-0.99), respectively (<i>P</i> trend=0.038). A graded, dose-response association was also present for sport/exercise-related physical activity (Quartiles 2, 3, and 4 versus Quartile 1: 0.92 [0.68-1.25], 0.87 [0.67-1.13], 0.75 [0.58-0.97], respectively; <i>P</i> trend=0.032). There were no statistically significant associations observed for overall physical activity, or work, active living, and household-related physical activities. In conclusion, the results of the current study suggest that regular moderate-vigorous physical activity or sport/exercise-related physical activity may reduce the risk of developing hypertension in African Americans.
Low birth weight and prematurity are risk factors for hypertension in adulthood. Few studies in preterm or full-term born children reported on plasma renin activity (PRA). We tested the hypothesis that renin might modulate the incidence of hypertension associated with prematurity. We enrolled 93 prematurely born children with birth weight <1000 g and 87 healthy controls born at term, who were all examined at ≈11 years. Renal length and glomerular filtration rate derived from serum cystatin C were 0.28 cm (95% confidence interval, 0.09-0.47) and 11.5 mL/min per 1.73 m<sup>2</sup> (6.4-16.6) lower in cases, whereas their systolic/diastolic blood pressure (BP) was 7.5 mm Hg (4.8-10.3)/4.0 mm Hg (2.1-5.8) higher (<i>P</i><0.001 for all). The odds of having systolic prehypertension or systolic hypertension associated with extreme low birth weight were 6.43 (2.52-16.4; <i>P</i><0.001) and 10.9 (2.46-48.4; <i>P</i>=0.002). Twenty-four hours of urinary sodium excretion was similar in cases and controls (102.1 versus 106.8 mmol; <i>P</i>=0.47). Sodium load per nephron was estimated as sodium excretion divided by kidney length (mmol/cm). PRA was 0.54 ng/mL per hour (0.23-0.85; <i>P</i>=0.001) lower in cases. PRA, systolic BP, and sodium load were available in 43 cases and 56 controls. PRA decreased with systolic BP (slope -0.022 ng/mL per hour/<sup>-</sup><sup>mm Hg</sup>; <i>P</i>=0.048), but was unrelated to sodium load (slope +0.13 mmol/cm<sup>-</sup><sup>mm Hg</sup>; <i>P</i>=0.54). The slope of PRA on systolic BP was similar (<i>P</i>=0.17) in cases and controls. In conclusion, extremely low birth weight predisposes young adolescents to low-renin hypertension, but does not affect the inverse association between PRA and BP.
URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT02147457.
Hypertension is a major cardiovascular risk factor and accounts for a large part of cardiovascular mortality. In this work, we analyzed the properties of hypertension genes and found that when compared with genes not yet known to be involved in hypertension regulation, known hypertension genes display distinguishing features: (1) hypertension genes tend to be located at network center; (2) hypertension genes tend to interact with each other; and (3) hypertension genes tend to enrich in certain biological processes and show certain phenotypes. Based on these features, we developed a machine-learning algorithm to predict new hypertension genes. One hundred and seventy-seven candidates were predicted with a posterior probability >0.9. Evidence supporting 17 of the predictions has been found.
Our aim was to assess optimal on-treatment blood pressure (BP) at which cardiovascular disease (CVD) and all-cause mortality risks are minimized in Japanese older adults with isolated systolic hypertension. We used data from the VALISH study (Valsartan in Elderly Isolated Systolic Hypertension) that recruited older adults (n=3035; mean age, 76 years) with systolic BP (SBP) of ≥160 mm Hg and diastolic BP of <90 mm Hg. Patients were treated by valsartan. Patients were also categorized into 3 groups based on achieved on-treatment SBP of <130 mm Hg (n=317), 130 to <145 mm Hg (n=2025), or ≥145 mm Hg (n=693). The primary outcome was composite CVD (coronary heart disease, stroke, heart failure, cardiovascular deaths, other vascular diseases, and kidney diseases) with secondary outcome being all-cause mortality. Cox proportional hazards models were used to assess the CVD risk for each group. Over a median 3-year follow-up (8022 person-years), 93 CVD events and 52 deaths occurred. Using the on-treatment SBP of 130 to <145 mm Hg as reference stratum, the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals of CVD and all-cause mortality risks for those with SBP<130 mm Hg were 2.08 (1.12-3.83) and 2.09 (0.93-4.71) and for those with SBP≥145 mm Hg were 2.29 (1.44-3.62) and 2.51 (1.35-4.66), respectively. On-treatment diastolic BP yielded no relationships with CVD or all-cause mortality risk. In conclusion, among Japanese older adults with isolated systolic hypertension, SBP in the range between 130 and 144 mm Hg was associated with minimal adverse outcomes and a reduction in CVD and all-cause mortality. The BP range will need to be confirmed in randomized controlled trials.
URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT00151229.
Age-related dementia, most commonly caused by Alzheimer disease or cerebrovascular factors (vascular dementia), is a major public health threat. Chronic arterial hypertension is a well-established risk factor for both types of dementia, but the link between hypertension and its treatment and cognition remains poorly understood. In this scientific statement, a multidisciplinary team of experts examines the impact of hypertension on cognition to assess the state of the knowledge, to identify gaps, and to provide future directions.
Authors with relevant expertise were selected to contribute to this statement in accordance with the American Heart Association conflict-of-interest management policy. Panel members were assigned topics relevant to their areas of expertise, reviewed the literature, and summarized the available data.
Hypertension disrupts the structure and function of cerebral blood vessels, leads to ischemic damage of white matter regions critical for cognitive function, and may promote Alzheimer pathology. There is strong evidence of a deleterious influence of midlife hypertension on late-life cognitive function, but the cognitive impact of late-life hypertension is less clear. Observational studies demonstrated a cumulative effect of hypertension on cerebrovascular damage, but evidence from clinical trials that antihypertensive treatment improves cognition is not conclusive.
After carefully reviewing the literature, the group concluded that there were insufficient data to make evidence-based recommendations. However, judicious treatment of hypertension, taking into account goals of care and individual characteristics (eg, age and comorbidities), seems justified to safeguard vascular health and, as a consequence, brain health.
Prehypertension is associated with increased risk for hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Data are limited on the temporal changes in the prevalence of prehypertension and risk factors for hypertension and cardiovascular disease among US adults with prehypertension. We analyzed data from 30 958 US adults ≥20 years of age who participated in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys between 1999 and 2012. Using the mean of 3 blood pressure (BP) measurements from a study examination, prehypertension was defined as systolic BP of 120 to 139 mm Hg and diastolic BP <90 mm Hg or diastolic BP of 80 to 89 mm Hg and systolic BP <140 mm Hg among participants not taking antihypertensive medication. Between 1999-2000 and 2011-2012, the percentage of US adults with prehypertension decreased from 31.2% to 28.2% (<i>P</i> trend=0.007). During this time period, the prevalence of several risk factors for cardiovascular disease and incident hypertension increased among US adults with prehypertension, including prediabetes (9.6% to 21.6%), diabetes mellitus (6.0% to 8.5%), overweight (33.5% to 37.3%), and obesity (30.6% to 35.2%). There was a nonstatistically significant increase in no weekly leisure-time physical activity (40.0% to 43.9%). Also, the prevalence of adhering to the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension eating pattern decreased (18.4% to 11.9%). In contrast, there was a nonstatistically significant decline in current smoking (25.9% to 23.2%). In conclusion, the prevalence of prehypertension has decreased modestly since 1999-2000. Population-level approaches directed at adults with prehypertension are needed to improve risk factors to prevent hypertension and cardiovascular disease.
Subjective daytime sleepiness is considered a significant risk factor of hypertension in patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). In this study, our goal was to examine the joint effect on hypertension of OSA and objective daytime sleepiness measured by the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT). A total of 1338 Chinese patients with OSA and 484 primary snorers were included in the study. All subjects underwent 1 night polysomnography followed by MSLT. The MSLT values were classified into 3 categories: >8 minutes, 5 to 8 minutes, and <5 minutes. Hypertension was defined based either on direct blood pressure measures or on diagnosis by a physician. After controlling for confounders, OSA combined with MSLT of 5 to 8 minutes increased the odds of hypertension by 95% (odds ratio, 1.95; 95% confidence interval, 1.10-3.46), whereas OSA combined with MSLT <5 minutes further increased the odds of hypertension by 111% (odds ratio, 2.11; 95% confidence interval, 1.22-3.31) compared with primary snorers with MSLT >8 minutes. In stratified analyses, the association of hypertension with MSLT in OSA patients was seen among both sexes, younger ages, both obese and nonobese patients, and patients with and without subjective excessive daytime sleepiness. We conclude that objective daytime sleepiness is associated with hypertension in patients with OSA.
Abdominal obesity is a major risk factor for hypertension. However, different distributions of abdominal adipose tissue may affect hypertension risk differently. The main purpose of this study was to explore the association of subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue (SAT) and visceral adipose tissue (VAT) with incident hypertension in a population-based setting. We hypothesized that VAT, rather than SAT, would be associated with incident hypertension. VAT and SAT were determined by ultrasound imagining in 3363 randomly selected Danes (mean age 49 years, 56% women, mean body mass index 25.8 kg/m<sup>2</sup>). We constructed multiple logistic regression models to compute standardized odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals per SD increase in SAT and VAT. Of the 2119 normotensive participants at baseline, 1432, with mean SAT of 2.8 cm and mean VAT of 5.7 cm, returned 5 years later for a follow-up examination and among them 203 had developed hypertension. In models including both VAT and SAT, the Framingham Hypertension Risk Score variables (age, sex, smoking status, family history of hypertension, and baseline blood pressure) and glycated hemoglobin, odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for incident hypertension for 1 SD increase in VAT and SAT was 1.27 (1.08-1.50, P=0.004) and 0.97 (0.81-1.15, P=0.70), respectively. Adjusting for body mass index instead of SAT attenuated the association between VAT and incident hypertension, but it was still significant (odds ratio, 1.22 [1.01-1.48, P=0.041] for each SD increase in VAT). In conclusion, ultrasound-determined VAT, but not SAT, was associated with incident hypertension in a random sample of Danish adults.
Arterial stiffness is an independent risk factor for stroke and myocardial infarction. This study was designed to investigate the role of SIRT1, an important deacetylase, and its relationship with Klotho, a kidney-derived aging-suppressor protein, in the pathogenesis of arterial stiffness and hypertension. We found that the serum level of Klotho was decreased by ≈45% in patients with arterial stiffness and hypertension. Interestingly, Klotho haplodeficiency caused arterial stiffening and hypertension, as evidenced by significant increases in pulse wave velocity and blood pressure in Klotho-haplodeficient (KL<sup>+/-</sup>) mice. Notably, the expression and activity of SIRT1 were decreased significantly in aortic endothelial and smooth muscle cells in KL<sup>+/-</sup> mice, suggesting that Klotho deficiency downregulates SIRT1. Treatment with SRT1720 (15 mg/kg/d, IP), a specific SIRT1 activator, abolished Klotho deficiency-induced arterial stiffness and hypertension in KL<sup>+/-</sup> mice. Klotho deficiency was associated with significant decreases in activities of AMP-activated protein kinase α (AMPKα) and endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) in aortas, which were abolished by SRT1720. Furthermore, Klotho deficiency upregulated NADPH oxidase activity and superoxide production, increased collagen expression, and enhanced elastin fragmentation in the media of aortas. These Klotho deficiency-associated changes were blocked by SRT1720. In conclusion, this study provides the first evidence that Klotho deficiency downregulates SIRT1 activity in arterial endothelial and smooth muscle cells. Pharmacological activation of SIRT1 may be an effective therapeutic strategy for arterial stiffness and hypertension.
Diabetes mellitus and hypertension are major risk factors for chronic kidney injury, together accounting for >70% of end-stage renal disease. In this study, we assessed interactions of hypertension and diabetes mellitus in causing kidney dysfunction and injury and the role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Hypertension was induced by aorta constriction (AC) between the renal arteries in 6-month-old male Goto-Kakizaki (GK) type 2 diabetic and control Wistar rats. Fasting plasma glucose averaged 162±11 and 87±2 mg/dL in GK and Wistar rats, respectively. AC produced hypertension in the right kidney (above AC) and near normal blood pressure in the left kidney (below AC), with both kidneys exposed to the same levels of glucose, circulating hormones, and neural influences. After 8 weeks of AC, blood pressure above the AC (and in the right kidney) increased from 109±1 to 152±5 mm Hg in GK rats and from 106±4 to 141±5 mm Hg in Wistar rats. The diabetic-hypertensive right kidneys in GK-AC rats had much greater increases in albumin excretion and histological injury compared with left kidneys (diabetes mellitus only) of GK rats or right kidneys (hypertension only) of Wistar-AC rats. Marked increases in ER stress and oxidative stress indicators were observed in diabetic-hypertensive kidneys of GK-AC rats. Inhibition of ER stress with tauroursodeoxycholic acid for 6 weeks reduced blood pressure (135±4 versus 151±4 mm Hg), albumin excretion, ER and oxidative stress, and glomerular injury, while increasing glomerular filtration rate in hypertensive-diabetic kidneys. These results suggest that diabetes mellitus and hypertension interact synergistically to promote kidney dysfunction and injury via ER stress.
High arterial stiffness seems to be causally involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension. We tested the hypothesis that offspring of parents with hypertension may display higher arterial stiffness before clinically manifest hypertension, given that hypertension is a heritable condition. We compared arterial tonometry measures in a sample of 1564 nonhypertensive Framingham Heart Study third-generation cohort participants (mean age: 38 years; 55% women) whose parents were enrolled in the Framingham Offspring Study. A total of 468, 715, and 381 participants had 0 (referent), 1, and 2 parents with hypertension. Parental hypertension was associated with greater offspring mean arterial pressure (multivariable-adjusted estimate=2.9 mm Hg; 95% confidence interval, 1.9-3.9, and 4.2 mm Hg; 95% confidence interval, 2.9-5.5, for 1 and 2 parents with hypertension, respectively; P<0.001 for both) and with greater forward pressure wave amplitude (1.6 mm Hg; 95% confidence interval, 0.6-2.7, and 1.9 mm Hg; 95% confidence interval, 0.6-3.2, for 1 and 2 parents with hypertension, respectively; P=0.003 for both). Carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity and augmentation index displayed similar dose-dependent relations with parental hypertension in sex-, age-, and height-adjusted models, but associations were attenuated on further adjustment. Offspring with at least 1 parent in the upper quartile of augmentation index and carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity had significantly higher values themselves (P≤0.02). In conclusion, in this community-based sample of young, nonhypertensive adults, we observed greater arterial stiffness in offspring of parents with hypertension. These observations are consistent with higher vascular stiffness at an early stage in the pathogenesis of hypertension.
Vascular remodeling is an important pathological feature of hypertension, leading to increased vascular resistance and reduced compliance. Endothelial cell (EC) and vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) dysfunction is involved in vascular remodeling. Long noncoding RNAs are potential regulators of EC and VSMC function. Herein, we determined whether long noncoding RNA-growth arrest-specific 5 (GAS5) is involved in hypertension-related vascular remodeling. We revealed that GAS5 knockdown aggravated hypertension-induced microvascular dysfunction as shown by increased retinal neovascularization and capillary leakage. GAS5 regulated the remodeling of arteries, including caudal arteries, carotid arteries, renal arteries, and thoracic arteries. GAS5 was mainly expressed in ECs and VSMCs, and its expression was significantly downregulated in hypertension. GAS5 knockdown affected endothelial activation, endothelial proliferation, VSMC phenotypic conversion, and EC-VSMC communication in vivo and in vitro. Mechanistically, GAS5 regulated EC and VSMC function through β-catenin signaling. This study identified GAS5 as a critical regulator in hypertension and demonstrated the potential of gene therapy and drug development for treating hypertension.
Sacubitril/valsartan (LCZ696), a novel angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor, was recently approved for the treatment of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Neprilysin degrades several peptides that modulate lipid metabolism, including natriuretic peptides. In this study, we investigated the effects of 8 weeks' treatment with sacubitril/valsartan on whole-body and adipose tissue lipolysis and lipid oxidation during defined physical exercise compared with the metabolically neutral comparator amlodipine. This was a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, active-controlled, parallel-group study enrolling subjects with abdominal obesity and moderate hypertension (mean sitting systolic blood pressure ≥130-180 mm Hg). Lipolysis during rest and exercise was assessed by microdialysis and [1,1,2,3,3-<sup>2</sup>H]-glycerol tracer kinetics. Energy expenditure and substrate oxidation were measured simultaneously using indirect calorimetry. Plasma nonesterified fatty acids, glycerol, insulin, glucose, adrenaline and noradrenaline concentrations, blood pressure, and heart rate were also determined. Exercise elevated plasma glycerol, free fatty acids, and interstitial glycerol concentrations and increased the rate of glycerol appearance. However, exercise-induced stimulation of lipolysis was not augmented on sacubitril/valsartan treatment compared with amlodipine treatment. Furthermore, sacubitril/valsartan did not alter energy expenditure and substrate oxidation during exercise compared with amlodipine treatment. In conclusion, sacubitril/valsartan treatment for 8 weeks did not elicit clinically relevant changes in exercise-induced lipolysis or substrate oxidation in obese patients with hypertension, implying that its beneficial cardiovascular effects cannot be explained by changes in lipid metabolism during exercise.
URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT01631864.
Although obesity and insulin resistance are closely correlated, their temporal sequences in early life and influence on adult hypertension are largely unknown. This study aims to delineate the temporal relationship patterns between body mass index (BMI) and insulin in childhood and their impact on adult hypertension. The longitudinal cohort consisted of 990 adults (630 whites and 360 blacks) who had BMI and fasting insulin measured twice 5.4 years apart in childhood (mean age, 10.5 years at baseline and 15.9 years at follow-up) and blood pressure measured 14.7 years later in adulthood (mean age, 30.5 years). Cross-lagged panel and mediation analysis models were used to examine the temporal relationship between childhood BMI and insulin and its impact on adult hypertension. After adjusting for age, race, sex, and follow-up years, the cross-lagged path coefficient (β=0.33; P<0.001) from baseline BMI to follow-up insulin was significantly greater than the path coefficient (β=-0.02; P>0.05) from baseline insulin to follow-up BMI in childhood with P<0.001 for the difference in βs. Blacks and whites showed similar patterns of the temporal relationship. The path coefficient (β=0.59; P<0.001) from BMI to insulin in the hypertensive group was significantly greater than that (β=0.24; P<0.001) in normotensive group, with P<0.001 for the difference in βs between these 2 groups. The mediation effect of childhood insulin on the childhood BMI-adult hypertension association was estimated at 21.1% (P<0.001). These findings provide evidence that higher BMI levels precede hyperinsulinemia during childhood, and this 1-directional relation plays a role in the development of hypertension.
The influence of a single gene on the pathogenesis of essential hypertension may be difficult to ascertain, unless the gene interacts with other genes that are germane to blood pressure regulation. G-protein-coupled receptor kinase type 4 (GRK4) is one such gene. We have reported that the expression of its variant hGRK4γ(142V) in mice results in hypertension because of impaired dopamine D1 receptor. Signaling through dopamine D1 receptor and angiotensin II type I receptor (AT1R) reciprocally modulates renal sodium excretion and blood pressure. Here, we demonstrate the ability of the hGRK4γ(142V) to increase the expression and activity of the AT1R. We show that hGRK4γ(142V) phosphorylates histone deacetylase type 1 and promotes its nuclear export to the cytoplasm, resulting in increased AT1R expression and greater pressor response to angiotensin II. AT1R blockade and the deletion of the Agtr1a gene normalize the hypertension in hGRK4γ(142V) mice. These findings illustrate the unique role of GRK4 by targeting receptors with opposite physiological activity for the same goal of maintaining blood pressure homeostasis, and thus making the GRK4 a relevant therapeutic target to control blood pressure. 
Chronic intermittent hypoxia (CIH), the main feature of obstructive sleep apnea, enhances carotid body (CB) chemosensory responses to hypoxia and produces autonomic dysfunction, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypertension. We tested whether autonomic alterations, arrhythmogenesis, and the progression of hypertension induced by CIH depend on the enhanced CB chemosensory drive, by ablation of the CB chemoreceptors. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to control (Sham) conditions for 7 days and then to CIH (5% O2, 12/h 8 h/d) for a total of 28 days. At 21 days of CIH exposure, rats underwent bilateral CB ablation and then exposed to CIH for 7 additional days. Arterial blood pressure and ventilatory chemoreflex response to hypoxia were measured in conscious rats. In addition, cardiac autonomic imbalance, cardiac baroreflex gain, and arrhythmia score were assessed during the length of the experiments. In separate experimental series, we measured extracellular matrix remodeling content in cardiac atrial tissue and systemic oxidative stress. CIH induced hypertension, enhanced ventilatory response to hypoxia, induced autonomic imbalance toward sympathetic preponderance, reduced baroreflex gain, and increased arrhythmias and atrial fibrosis. CB ablation normalized blood pressure, reduced ventilatory response to hypoxia, and restored cardiac autonomic and baroreflex function. In addition, CB ablation reduced the number of arrhythmias, but not extracellular matrix remodeling or systemic oxidative stress, suggesting that reductions in arrhythmia incidence during CIH were related to normalization of cardiac autonomic balance. Present results show that autonomic alterations induced by CIH are critically dependent on the CB and support a main role for the CB in the CIH-induced hypertension.
Metabolomics is a promising tool to gain new insights into early metabolic alterations preceding the development of hypertension in humans. We therefore aimed to identify metabolites associated with incident hypertension using measured data of serum metabolites of the European Prospective Investigation Into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Potsdam study. Targeted metabolic profiling was conducted on serum blood samples of a randomly drawn EPIC-Potsdam subcohort consisting of 135 cases and 981 noncases of incident hypertension, all of them being free of hypertension and not on antihypertensive therapy at the time of blood sampling. Mean follow-up was 9.9 years. A validated set of 127 metabolites was statistically analyzed with a random survival forest backward selection algorithm to identify predictive metabolites of incident hypertension taking into account important epidemiological hypertension risk markers. Six metabolites were identified to be most predictive for the development of hypertension. Higher concentrations of serine, glycine, and acyl-alkyl-phosphatidylcholines C42:4 and C44:3 tended to be associated with higher and diacyl-phosphatidylcholines C38:4 and C38:3 with lower predicted 10-year hypertension-free survival, although visualization by partial plots revealed some nonlinearity in the above associations. The identified metabolites improved prediction of incident hypertension when used together with known risk markers of hypertension. In conclusion, these findings indicate that metabolic alterations occur early in the development of hypertension. However, these alterations are confined to a few members of the amino acid or phosphatidylcholine metabolism, respectively.
According to cognitive models, obsessive compulsive symptoms result from catastrophic misinterpretations of commonly occurring intrusive experiences and the use of counterproductive strategies to manage them. Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) related beliefs such as inflated responsibility, importance of thoughts and perfectionism increases the likelihood of such misinterpretations. Consistent with a growing body of literature supporting the usefulness of mobile delivered technologies in fostering cognitive behavior change, the present study assessed the effectiveness of a novel cognitive training exercise designed to challenge OCD-related beliefs. This mobile app training exercise consists of users having to pull statements challenging OCD beliefs towards themselves (downwards) and to throw away (push upwards) contra-productive self-statements.
36 third-year BA students started the trial. Twenty completed pre and post measures of OCD-beliefs, mood and OCD symptoms including relationship-obsessions. Participants were instructed to complete 3 min of daily training for a period of 15 days.
No significant differences were found between completers and non-completers on demographic and most symptom related measures at Time 1. Repeated-measures MANOVA of the 20 completers showed a significant reduction on all OCD symptoms measures and on OCD-beliefs. No significant reduction was found in depression symptoms. Regression analysis showed change in levels of OCD-beliefs was associated with reduction in OCD symptoms at Time 2 over and above OCD symptoms at Time 1.
The study is an open trial with non-clinical participants.
This mobile delivered training exercise may be useful for the reduction and relapse prevention of OCD-related beliefs and symptoms.
There is little research on treating symptoms of sexual orientation-obsessive-compulsive disorder (SO-OCD). Semantic networks represent a new cognitive approach for understanding cognitive mechanisms of SO-OCD. Specifically, we tested whether the self-help cognitive technique of association splitting (AS) developed from this approach would be efficacious in reducing SO-OCD symptoms and thought suppression. One hundred and twenty heterosexual undergraduates (82 females, 38 males) were randomly assigned to either the AS or waitlist control group. At baseline and four weeks later, participants completed items assessing SO-OCD symptoms, measures of sexual obsessions and thought suppression, and an association task in which they generated associations to different cue words. Generated associations were coded based on SO-OCD relevance and emotional valence. Results indicated reductions in SO-OCD-relevant associations across levels of emotional valence and SO-OCD-irrelevant negative associations, and increases in SO-OCD-irrelevant positive and neutral associations, only in the AS group. Furthermore, there were reductions in SO-OCD symptoms, sexual obsessions, and thought suppression only in the AS group. Importantly, these findings were obtained with overall large effect sizes. AS appears to be an efficacious self-help technique in reducing SO-OCD symptoms, sexual obsessions, and thought suppression. Clinical implications, limitations, and suggestions for future research are discussed.
Previous studies have shown that individuals diagnosed with OCD tend to rely on explicit processing while performing implicit learning tasks. We sought to investigate whether individuals with OCD are capable of implicit learning, but would demonstrate improved performance when explicit processing strategies are enhanced. Twenty-four participants with OCD and 24 non-psychiatric control (NPC) participants performed an implicit learning task in which they responded to a single target stimulus that successively appears at one of four locations according to an underlying sequence. We manipulated the learning strategy by informing half of the participants that the target stimulus location was determined by an underlying sequence, which they should identify (intentional learning). The other half of the participants was not informed of the existence of the underlying sequence, and was expected to learn the sequence implicitly (standard learning). We predicted that OCD participants will exhibit inferior performance compared to NPC participants in the standard learning condition, and that intentional learning instructions would impair the performance of NPC participants, but enhance the performance of OCD participants. The results supported these predictions and suggest that individuals with OCD prefer controlled to automatic processing. We discuss the implications of this conclusion to our understanding of OCD.
Cognitive-behavioural models of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) stemmed from knowledge acquired from cognitive science. Researchers continue to apply basic cognitive-affective science methods to understanding OCD, with the overarching goal of improving and refining evidence-based treatments. However, the degree to which such research has contributed to this goal is unclear. We reviewed OCD research in the general areas that comprise basic cognitive science, and evaluated the degree to which it has contributed to our understanding of the development, maintenance, and treatment of OCD. We focused on studies that either compared people with and without OCD and/or used experimental psychopathology methods with human participants, and attempted to resolve some of the conflicting theories related to the importance of cognitive deficits vs. cognitive biases. Overall, we observed equivocal findings for deficits in perception, attention, memory, and executive functioning. Moreover, many so-called deficits were moderated and/or explained by OCD-relevant beliefs, highlighting the role of confidence in cognitive processes as integral to our understanding of OCD. We discussed these findings in terms of cognitive measurement, cognitive-behavioural models, and clinical applicability, and made recommendations for future research that may offer innovation and insight helpful to clinicians working to improve the symptoms and lives of people with OCD.
Research indicates that patients with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) frequently suffer from comorbid sleep difficulties, and that these difficulties often are not clinically recognized and diagnosed. There has been limited research investigating if comorbid sleep difficulties impair treatment outcome for OCD and if the sleep difficulties change following OCD-treatment. Thirty-six patients with obsessive compulsive disorder underwent concentrated exposure treatment delivered in a group over four consecutive days and were assessed with measures of OCD, depressive symptoms and sleep disturbance at three different time points (pre, post and 6 months follow-up). The sample was characterized by a high degree of comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders. At pre-treatment nearly 70% of the patients reported sleep difficulties indicative of primary insomnia. The results showed that patients had large reductions of OCD-symptoms as well as significant improvements in sleep disturbance assessed after treatment, and that these improvements were maintained at follow-up. Sleep disturbance did not impair treatment outcome, on the contrary patients with higher degree of sleep disturbance at pre-treatment had better outcome on OCD-symptoms after treatment. The results indicated that the majority of the OCD sample suffered from sleep disturbances and that these sleep disturbances were significantly reduced following adequate treatment of OCD without specific sleep interventions. However, a proportion of the patients suffered from residual symptoms of insomnia after treatment.
A body of evidence has supported that patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have increased rates of various neurological soft signs (NSS) compared to controls. Various lines of research has documented robust relationships between OCD and dissociative symptomatology. The study aimed to examine the associations between obsessive-compulsive symptoms, dissociative experiences alexithymia, and NSS. The study included thirty OCD patients and thirty healthy controls, matched for age, marital status, education, and income. The Neurological Evaluation Scale (NES), Padua Inventory-Revised (PI-R), Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES) and Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20) were administered. In comparison to healthy controls, patients with OCD had difficulty sequencing for complex motor acts and greater absorption/ imaginative involvement. Using latent class analysis, the study sample was classified into two homogenous subsets as mild NSS (n = 45) and severe NSS (n = 15). Majority of the participants who were grouped into severe NSS latent class were OCD patient (n = 14, 93.3%). Furthermore, those with severe NSS reported greater levels of alexithymia and more severe obsessive-compulsive symptoms, particularly precision. We concluded that relationships between OCD severity and NSS appear to be of crucial importance. Our data along with accumulated evidence suggest that OCD associated with pronounced NSS may represent a specific subtype of the disorder.
Structural brain imaging studies in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have produced inconsistent findings. This may be partially due to limited statistical power from relatively small samples and clinical heterogeneity related to variation in illness profile and developmental stage. To address these limitations, the authors conducted meta- and mega-analyses of data from OCD sites worldwide.
T<sub>1</sub> images from 1,830 OCD patients and 1,759 control subjects were analyzed, using coordinated and standardized processing, to identify subcortical brain volumes that differ between OCD patients and healthy subjects. The authors performed a meta-analysis on the mean of the left and right hemisphere measures of each subcortical structure, and they performed a mega-analysis by pooling these volumetric measurements from each site. The authors additionally examined potential modulating effects of clinical characteristics on morphological differences in OCD patients.
The meta-analysis indicated that adult patients had significantly smaller hippocampal volumes (Cohen's d=-0.13; % difference=-2.80) and larger pallidum volumes (d=0.16; % difference=3.16) compared with adult controls. Both effects were stronger in medicated patients compared with controls (d=-0.29, % difference=-4.18, and d=0.29, % difference=4.38, respectively). Unmedicated pediatric patients had significantly larger thalamic volumes (d=0.38, % difference=3.08) compared with pediatric controls. None of these findings were mediated by sample characteristics, such as mean age or scanning field strength. The mega-analysis yielded similar results.
The results indicate different patterns of subcortical abnormalities in pediatric and adult OCD patients. The pallidum and hippocampus seem to be of importance in adult OCD, whereas the thalamus seems to be key in pediatric OCD. These findings highlight the potential importance of neurodevelopmental alterations in OCD and suggest that further research on neuroplasticity in OCD may be useful.
Research on incompleteness and not-just right experiences, (INC/NJREs) indicate that some OCD symptom dimensions are motivated by these experiences rather than by anxiety. Most published data are correlational, using non-clinical individuals. This study sought to examine INC/NJREs in vivo in non-clinical and OCD individuals.
Study 1: Ninety-three undergraduates were randomly assigned to a INC/NJREs induction (n=44) or non-induction task (n=47). Scores on self-reports assessing INC, NJREs, OCD, Anxiety, and Depression were also recorded. Study 2: Twenty adults with OCD performed the induction task and completed the same questionnaire-packet as the non-clinical participants.
Study 1: The induction-group scored higher on several DVs of the experimental task, as INC/NJREs and uncomfortable physical sensations predicted impulses/urges to do something. All the DVs correlated with INC, NJREs, and OCD symptoms. Anxiety was only related to suppressing difficulties of the most intense sensation. Study 2: Results were comparable to those found in non-clinical people. Induced INC/NJREs correlated with compulsions severity and were associated with ordering, washing, and hoarding symptoms. OCDs did not differ from non-clinical subjects in the number of induced INC/NJREs, but they were more disturbing, difficult to suppress, and instigated more urges to do in OCDs.
The small group of OCDs and the lack of a non-OCD clinical group kept us from drawing conclusions about the specificity of INC/NJREs to some OCD symptoms.
Findings support the role of INC/NJREs as stimuli triggering urges and/impulses to do and their impact on OCD severity.
The purpose of the current study was to conduct a randomized controlled trial testing the efficacy of aerobic exercise for decreasing OCD symptom severity, other mental health outcomes, and increasing exercise behaviors and cardiorespiratory fitness among individuals with OCD.
Fifty-six patients (64% female; mean age=38.8years) with OCD and a Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) score of 16 or greater despite engaging in OCD treatment were randomized to 12-weeks of supervised plus home-based moderate-intensity aerobic exercise (AE; n=28) or to 12-weeks of health education sessions (HE; n=28).
Random intercepts mixed models examined differences between conditions at post-treatment. Though no difference between conditions on outcomes was observed, both AE and HE showed significant reduction in OCD symptom severity, depression and anxiety at post-treatment. Relative to HE, significant increases were noted in amount of exercise and cardiorespiratory fitness for those in the AE condition. At post-treatment, 30.4% of the AE condition (7 of 23) were treatment-responders (using the commonly accepted measure of 35% symptom reduction from baseline). In the HE condition, 7.7% of the sample (2 of 26) met this criterion at post-treatment.
The results of this preliminary study suggest that exercise and health-focused interventions may be beneficial adjuncts to existing OCD treatment. Future studies with larger samples are needed to more definitively answer questions the efficacy of AE for reducing OCD symptoms and improving related clinical outcomes.
In the last decades the pharmacological treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) has been significantly promoted by the effectiveness of selective serotonin (5-HT) reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and the subsequent development of the 5-HT hypothesis of OCD. However, since a large majority of patients (between 40% and 60 %) do not respond to SSRIs or strategies based on the modulation of the 5-HT system, it is now essential to search for other possible therapeutic targets.
The aim of this paper was to review current literature through a PubMed and Google Scholar search of novel hypotheses and related compounds for the treatment of OCD, with a special focus on the glutammate and the immune systems.
The literature would indicate that glutamate, the main excitatory neurotransmitter, might play an important role in the pathophysiology of OCD. In addition, a series of clinical study would also support the potential efficacy of drugs modulating the glutamate system. The role of the immune system alterations in OCD in both children and adults needs to be more deeply elucidated. In children, it has been widely described a subtype of OCD resulting from infections driven by group A streptococcus β-hemolitic and belonging to the so-called "pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcus" (PANDAS). In adults, available findings are meager and controversial, although interesting.
The glutamate and the immune systems represent two intriguing topics of research that hold promises of development of open novel treatment strategies in OCD.
Glutamate-modulating agents are of increasing interest in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Current pharmacotherapies for OCD target the serotonin and dopamine systems, and are limited in efficacy. N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is an over-the-counter amino acid supplement that inhibits glutamate neurotransmission and has been shown in preliminary studies to reduce symptoms in OCD and related compulsive disorders. Despite growing interest in NAC as a novel psychiatric medication, no studies currently exist examining the effects of NAC in animal models of compulsive disorders. Here, we investigate NAC in a well-validated mouse model of OCD that is predictive of treatment efficacy as well as the time course for therapeutic onset of OCD medications. NAC (60 mg/kg/day or 120 mg/kg/day) was administered via the drinking water of mice for 3 weeks prior to behavioral testing. Mice were tested in the delayed alternation task (DAT) and open field test following acute serotonin 1B receptor (5-HT1B) agonist challenge to induce OCD-related behavior. We found that both doses of NAC blocked 5-HT1B agonist-induced deficits on the DAT. In a separate study, we administered NAC (60 mg/kg/day) for 1 week or 3 weeks in the drinking water of mice prior to examining OCD-related behavior. We found that blockade of 5-HT1B agonist-induced OCD-like behavior is present at 3 weeks, but not 1 week, of NAC treatment. Together, our findings suggest that NAC is a novel OCD treatment with potential utility as monotherapy and therapeutic effects that emerge on a time-course similar to established medications. (PsycINFO Database Record
How we conceptualize mental health conditions is important as it impacts on a wide range of mediators of treatment outcome. We do not know how children intuitively conceptualize obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), nor do we know the relative impact of biomedical or cognitive behavioural conceptual explanations, yet both are being widely used in psychoeducation for children with OCD.
This study identified children's naive concepts of OCD, and the comparative impact of biomedical versus cognitive behavioural psychoeducation on perceived prognosis.
A within- and between-subjects experimental design was used. After watching a video of a young person describing their OCD, 202 children completed a questionnaire examining their concepts of the condition. They repeated the questionnaire following a second equivalent video, this time preceded by either biomedical or cognitive behavioural psychoeducation.
Participants' naive concepts of OCD reflected predominant models of OCD in healthcare. Even at the minimal dose of psychoeducation, participants' conceptualizations of OCD changed. Prior exposure to OCD resulted in a stronger alignment with the biomedical model. Exposure to biomedical psychoeducation resulted in participants predicting a slower recovery with less chance of complete remission.
Psychoeducation for childhood OCD is impactful. Despite its wide use by clinicians and mental health services, biomedical psychoeducation appears to have deleterious effects. Children's concepts of OCD merit attention but caution should be applied in how they are targeted.
Depression is a commonly occurring symptom in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and is associated with worse functional impairment, poorer quality of life, and poorer treatment response. Understanding the underlying neurochemical and connectivity-based brain mechanisms of this important symptom domain in OCD is necessary for development of novel, more globally effective treatments. To investigate biopsychological mechanisms of comorbid depression in OCD, we examined effective connectivity and neurochemical signatures in the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (pACC), a structure known to be involved in both OCD and depression. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and <sup>1</sup>H magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) data were obtained from participants with OCD (n=49) and healthy individuals of equivalent age and sex (n=25). Granger causality-based effective (directed) connectivity was used to define causal networks involving the right and left pACC. The interplay between fMRI connectivity, <sup>1</sup>H MRS and clinical data was explored by applying moderation and mediation analyses. We found that the causal influence of the right dorsal anterior midcingulate cortex (daMCC) on the right pACC was significantly lower in the OCD group and showed significant correlation with depressive symptom severity in the OCD group. Lower and moderate levels of glutamate (Glu) in the right pACC significantly moderated the interaction between right daMCC-pACC connectivity and depression severity. Our results suggest a biochemical-connectivity-psychological model of pACC dysfunction contributing to depression in OCD, particularly involving intracingulate connectivity and glutamate levels in the pACC. These findings have implications for potential molecular and network targets for treatment of this multi-faceted psychiatric condition.
This study aimed to assess the factor structure of early and late onset OCD. Additionally, cluster analysis was conducted in the same sample to assess the applicability of the factors. 345 participants were assessed with Yale Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale symptom checklist. Patients were classified as early onset (onset of symptoms at age ≤ 18 years) and late onset (onset at age > 18 years) OCD depending upon the age of onset of the symptoms. Factor analysis and cluster analysis of early-onset and late-onset OCD was conducted. The study sample comprised of 91 early onset and 245 late onset OCD subjects. Males were more common in the early onset group. Differences in the frequency of phenomenology related to contamination related, checking, repeating, counting and ordering/arranging compulsions were present across the early and late onset groups. Factor analysis of YBOCS revealed a 3 factor solution for both the groups, which largely concurred with each other. These factors were named as hoarding and symmetry (factor-1), contamination (factor-2) and aggressive, sexual and religious factor (factor-3). To conclude this study shows that factor structure of symptoms of OCD seems to be similar between early-onset and late-onset OCD.
One to three percent of the adult population suffers from obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD). Previous studies have also shown that, compared to controls, patients with OCD report a lower QoL. The latter is associated with self-rated symptoms of depression and anxiety. The aim of the present study was to compare the quality of life of OCD patients with that of healthy controls, while introducing expert-rated symptoms of depression and anxiety as covariates. Gender was also taken into account as an additional associated factor.
A total of 100 patients diagnosed with OCD (mean age: 32 years; 64% females) and healthy 100 controls (mean age: 31 years; 59% females; no discernible psychiatric disorder) took part in the present cross-sectional study. All participants completed questionnaires covering socio-demographic characteristics and dimensions of QoL. Experts rated participants' symptoms of OCD (Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale), anxiety (Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale) and depression (Hamilton Depression Rating Scale).
Compared to healthy controls, patients with OCD reported a lower QoL, and had higher symptoms of depression and anxiety. This pattern was particularly pronounced among female patients with OCD. QoL was lower in patients with OCD, even when controlling for depression and anxiety. Results from binary logistic regressions showed that female gender, low QoL and higher symptoms of OCD, depression and anxiety together predicted status as patient with OCD.
Compared to healthy controls, patients with OCD have a poorer quality of life and this is independent of depression or anxiety, and is particularly pronounced among female patients. Thus, treatment of OCD might take into account patients' comorbidities and gender.
Prior research has identified OCD subtypes or "clusters" of symptoms that differentially relate to clinical features of the disorder. Given the high comorbidity between OCD and anxiety, OCD symptom clusters may more broadly associate with fear and/or distress internalizing constructs. This study examines fear and distress dimensions, including physical concerns (fear), separation anxiety (fear), perfectionism (distress), and anxious coping (distress), as predictors of previously empirically-derived OCD symptom clusters in a sample of 215 youth diagnosed with primary OCD (ages 7-17, mean age = 12.25). Self-reported separation fears predicted membership in Cluster 1 (aggressive, sexual, religious, somatic obsessions, and checking compulsions) while somatic/autonomic fears predicted membership in Cluster 2 (symmetry obsessions and ordering, counting, repeating compulsions). Results highlight the diversity of pediatric OCD symptoms and their differential association with fear, suggesting the need to carefully assess both OCD and global fear constructs that might be directly targeted in treatment.
Ethological methods used to analyze human obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) rituals demonstrated excess of unnecessary repetitions as well as irrelevant, idiosyncratic acts (additions) compared to normal activity. A question that still remains is whether these well-known repetitions and additions are manifested in behaviors unrelated to the OCD rituals. Our objectives were to: (1) assess whether OCD-related repetitions and additions as found in previous studies also affect the patients' activity of filling out questionnaires and (2) evaluate the specificity of these behaviors to OCD as opposed to other anxiety disorders and healthy controls.
Several standardized disorder-specific self-report questionnaires were used in order to assess the patient's psychopathologies. The style of filling-out these questionnaires by OCD and non-OCD anxiety outpatients and normal controls was analyzed. Four categories were used: omissions, repetitions, corrections, and additions.
The OCD group scored significantly higher on the number of additions as compared with both the anxiety group and the nonclinical group, and significantly higher on the number of corrections and repetitions as compared with the nonclinical group.
The hallmarks of OCD, repetitions and additions, are manifested not only in the patient's rituals and thoughts, but in apparently "neutral" tasks that do not a priori involve the intrusive thoughts, urges, and images typical of obsessive-compulsive behavior. Additions seem to be more specific to OCD than repetitions. These two executive faults impede routine functionality of OCD patients in tasks related and unrelated to their rituals. Our study delineates simple, observable behavioral characteristics that distinguish between OCD and non-OCD anxiety patients as well as healthy individuals. These symptomatic behaviors may offer a clue to personality traits or deficits in executive functions that possibly play a part in the pathophysiology of OCD. Our results are an additional indication that nonfunctionality in obsessive-compulsive behavior deserves full attention for a better understanding of the psychopathological mechanisms of OCD.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has been found to be highly comorbid in children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Some have proposed, however, that obsessive anxiety may cause inattention and executive dysfunction, leading to inappropriate ADHD diagnoses in those with OCD. If this were the case, these symptoms would be expected to decrease following successful OCD treatment. The present study tested this hypothesis and evaluated whether ADHD symptoms at baseline predicted OCD treatment response. Obsessive-compulsive and ADHD symptoms were assessed in 50 youth enrolled in a randomized controlled trial investigating selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor and cognitive behavioral treatment. Repeated-measures analysis of variance (RMANOVA) revealed that ADHD symptoms at baseline do not significantly predict treatment outcome. A multivariate RMANOVA found that OCD treatment response moderated change in inattention; participants who showed greater reduction in OCD severity experienced greater reduction in ADHD-inattentive symptoms, while those with less substantial reduction in obsessions and compulsions showed less change. These findings suggest that children and adolescents with OCD and inattention may experience meaningful improvements in attention problems following OCD treatment. Thus, in many youth with OCD, inattention may be inherently tied to obsessions and compulsions. Clinicians may consider addressing OCD in treatment before targeting inattentive-type ADHD.
Clinical and pharmacological studies of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have suggested that the serotonergic systems are involved in the pathogenesis, while structural imaging studies have found some neuroanatomical abnormalities in OCD patients. In the etiopathogenesis of OCD, few studies have performed concurrent assessment of genetic and neuroanatomical variables.
We carried out a two-way ANOVA between a variable number of tandem repeat polymorphisms (5-HTTLPR) in the serotonin transporter gene and gray matter (GM) volumes in 40 OCD patients and 40 healthy controls (HCs).
We found that relative to the HCs, the OCD patients showed significant decreased GM volume in the right hippocampus, and increased GM volume in the left precentral gyrus. 5-HTTLPR polymorphism in OCD patients had a statistical tendency of stronger effects on the right frontal pole than those in HCs.
Our results showed that the neuroanatomical changes of specific GM regions could be endophenotypes of 5-HTTLPR polymorphism in OCD.
Dual-process models suggest that automatic behavioral tendencies contribute to the development and maintenance of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) symptoms. The aim of the present study was to investigate the potential of the Approach-Avoidance Task (AAT) to reduce OCD symptoms and associated distress.
The study was set up as an online intervention. Participants with OCD symptoms (N = 101) were randomly assigned either to one of two experimental conditions or a waitlist control group upon completion of an online baseline survey. Participants were instructed to respond to contamination-related and neutral pictures by pulling or pushing a computer mouse, respectively. In one AAT condition, contamination-relevant pictures remained on the screen one second after pulling (lock condition), while pictures disappeared immediately after pulling in the standard AAT. Participants completed an online re-assessment four weeks after baseline.
For analyses, only data of patients with contamination-related OCD symptoms were analyzed. A significant reduction in distress caused by OCD symptoms was found for both AAT training groups. Furthermore, a reduction in compulsions occurred for the group using the standard AAT. No significant effect was found for the control group.
Implicit behavioral tendencies prior to and after training were not assessed.
Findings tentatively suggest that the AAT might be effective in reducing washing-/contamination-related OCD symptoms.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) has a chronic course leading to huge impact in the patient's functioning. Suicidal thoughts and attempts are much more frequent in OCD subjects than once thought before.
To empirically investigate whether the suicidal phenomena could be analyzed as a suicidality severity continuum and its association with obsessive-compulsive (OC) symptom dimensions and quality of life (QoL), in a large OCD sample.
Cross-sectional study with 548 patients diagnosed with OCD according to the DSM-IV criteria, interviewed in the Brazilian OCD Consortium (C-TOC) sites. Patients were evaluated by OCD experts using standardized instruments including: Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (YBOCS); Dimensional Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (DYBOCS); Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories; Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID); and the SF-36 QoL Health Survey.
There were extremely high correlations between all the suicidal phenomena. OCD patients with suicidality had significantly lower QoL, higher severity in the "sexual/religious", "aggression" and "symmetry/ordering" OC symptom dimensions, higher BDI and BA scores and a higher frequency of suicide attempts in a family member. In the regression analysis, the factors that most impacted suicidality were the sexual dimension severity, the SF-36 QoL Mental Health domain, the severity of depressive symptoms and a relative with an attempted suicide history.
Suicidality could be analyzed as a severity continuum and patients should be carefully monitored since they present with suicidal ideation. Lower QoL scores, higher scores on the sexual dimension and a family history of suicide attempts should be considered as risk factors for suicidality among OCD patients.
Although some studies have found that guilt may precede, motivate, or be a consequence of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), the relationship between guilt and OCD has been under investigated. The studies that explored the role of trait guilt (guilt propensity) in OCD reported inconsistent findings and failed to support its predictive role. Since it has been suggested that OCD patients perceive guilt in a more threatening manner, it might also be relevant to test to what extent they negatively evaluate the experience of guilt (i.e., guilt sensitivity; GS). Study 1 investigated the psychometric properties of a new 10-item Italian measure developed to assess GS-named Guilt Sensitivity Questionnaire-in a nonclinical sample (N = 473). Results from exploratory factor analyses supported the unidimensionality of the scale. It also showed excellent internal consistency and good discriminant validity. Study 2 investigated the role of GS in OCD symptoms, in particular with regard to responsibility for harm obsessions and checking compulsions, using a heterogeneous OCD sample (N = 61) and a control group of patients with anxiety disorders (N = 47). GS was the unique significant predictor of checking related OCD symptoms independent of negative mood states and obsessive beliefs. Guilt Sensitivity Questionnaire scores of patients with responsibility for harm concerns were significantly higher than those of patients with other kinds of obsessive concerns and with anxiety disorders. Findings supported the hypothesis that GS plays a relevant role in OCD symptoms when checking rituals are primarily involved. Implications for current cognitive behavioral models are discussed.
Guilt sensitivity may play a role in checking-related OCD symptoms. We developed a psychometrically sound unidimensional 10-item scale to assess guilt sensitivity. Guilt sensitivity was a unique predictor of checking-related OCD symptoms. Targeting beliefs about the intolerability/dangerousness of experiencing guilt may be useful. Acceptance-based approaches may be helpful as they promote the acceptance of guilt.
Frontal electroencephalographic alpha asymmetry as an indicator of trait approach and trait inhibition systems has previously been studied in individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) with mixed results. We explored frontal alpha asymmetry as a possible risk factor in OCD by investigating a large sample of OCD patients (n = 113), healthy control participants (n = 113), and unaffected 1st-degree relatives of OCD patients (n = 37). Additionally, the relationship between OCD symptom dimensions and frontal alpha asymmetry was explored. OCD patients and healthy control participants did not differ in alpha asymmetry scores. Hence, the current results do not support the notion that OCD as a diagnostic entity is associated with a shift in frontal cortical activity. Furthermore, alpha asymmetry scores were not statistically related to specific OCD symptom dimensions. Reasons for inconsistent results in OCD are discussed and should be explored in future studies. Compared to OCD patients and healthy control participants, unaffected 1st-degree relatives of OCD patients showed increased left frontal activity. Such asymmetry has previously been found to be associated with positive affect and adaptive emotion regulation under stress. Because stressful life events play an important role in the onset and exacerbation of OCD, increased left frontal activity might serve as a resilience factor in unaffected 1st-degree relatives. Future studies should follow up on these results with longitudinal risk studies and pre- and posttherapy assessments to further explore causality of this putative factor. (PsycINFO Database Record
To collate data from multiple obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) treatment centers across seven countries and five continents, and to report findings in relation to OCD comorbidity, age of onset of OCD and comorbid disorders, and suicidality, in a large clinical and ethnically diverse sample, with the aim of investigating cultural variation and the utility of the psychiatric diagnostic classification of obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Researchers in the field of OCD were invited to contribute summary statistics on current and lifetime psychiatric comorbidity, age of onset of OCD and comorbid disorders and suicidality in their patients with OCD.
Data from 3711 adult patients with primary OCD came from Brazil (n=955), India (n=802), Italy (n=750), South Africa (n=565), Japan (n=322), Australia (n=219), and Spain (n=98). The most common current comorbid disorders were major depressive disorder (28.4%; n=1055), obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (24.5%, n=478), generalized anxiety disorder (19.3%, n=716), specific phobia (19.2%, n=714) and social phobia (18.5%, n=686). Major depression was also the most commonly co-occurring lifetime diagnosis, with a rate of 50.5% (n=1874). OCD generally had an age of onset in late adolescence (mean=17.9years, SD=1.9). Social phobia, specific phobia and body dysmorphic disorder also had an early age of onset. Co-occurring major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder and psychotic disorders tended to have a later age of onset than OCD. Suicidal ideation within the last month was reported by 6.4% (n=200) of patients with OCD and 9.0% (n=314) reported a lifetime history of suicide attempt.
In this large cross-continental study, comorbidity in OCD was common. The high rates of comorbid major depression and anxiety disorders emphasize the need for clinicians to assess and monitor for these disorders. Earlier ages of onset of OCD, specific phobia and social phobia may indicate some relatedness between these disorders, but this requires further study. Although there do not appear to be significant cultural variations in rates or patterns of comorbidity and suicidality, further research using similar recruitment strategies and controlling for demographic and clinical variables may help to determine whether any sociocultural factors protect against suicidal ideation or psychiatric comorbidity in patients with OCD.
The aim of this study was to investigate a new measure, the Wetterneck-Hart OCD Screener (WHOS), as a self-report screening tool for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). The authors examined relationships between the WHOS and severity scores of OCD measures taken via three methods of data collection: online, at OCD consumer conferences, and from an intensive, residential OCD program. Severity measures included the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale-Self Report (Y-BOCS-SR), the Dimensional Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (DOCS), and the Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised (OCI-R). A total of 525 participants took the measures: 298 from online websites, 100 from OCD conferences, and 127 from a residential OCD program. Significant differences were found between the OCD and non-OCD groups classified by the WHOS for each of the OCD severity measures. The authors conclude that the WHOS is useful in predicting the presence of clinically severe OCD symptoms and could be employed in clinical and research endeavors.
Depression is the most common comorbidity in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). However, the mechanisms of depressive comorbidity in OCD are poorly understood. We assessed the directionality and moderators of the OCD-depression association over time in a large, prospective clinical sample of OCD patients.
Data were drawn from 382 OCD patients participating at the Netherlands Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Association (NOCDA) study. Cross-lagged, structural equation modeling analyses were used to assess the temporal association between OCD and depressive symptoms. Assessments were conducted at baseline, two-year and four-year follow up. Cognitive and interpersonal moderators of the prospective association between OCD and depressive symptoms were tested.
Cross-lagged analyses demonstrated that OCD predicts depressive symptoms at two-year follow up and not vice a versa. This relationship disappeared at four-year follow up. Secure attachment style moderated the prospective association between OCD and depression.
Depressive comorbidity in OCD might constitute a functional consequence of the incapacitating OCD symptoms. Both OCD and depression symptoms demonstrated strong stability effects between two-year and four-year follow up, which may explain the lack of association between them in that period. Among OCD patients, secure attachment represents a buffer against future depressive symptoms.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are both highly heritable neurodevelopmental disorders that conceivably share genetic risk factors. However, the underlying genetic determinants remain largely unknown. In this work, the authors describe a combined genome-wide association study (GWAS) of ASD and OCD. The OCD dataset includes 2998 individuals in nuclear families. The ASD dataset includes 6898 individuals in case-parents trios. GWAS summary statistics were examined for potential enrichment of functional variants associated with gene expression levels in brain regions. The top ranked SNP is rs4785741 (chromosome 16) with P value=6.9×10<sup>-7</sup> in our re-analysis. Polygenic risk score analyses were conducted to investigate the genetic relationship within and across the two disorders. These analyses identified a significant polygenic component of ASD, predicting 0.11% of the phenotypic variance in an independent OCD data set. In addition, we examined the genomic architecture of ASD and OCD by estimating heritability on different chromosomes and different allele frequencies, analyzing genome-wide common variant data by using the Genome-wide Complex Trait Analysis (GCTA) program. The estimated global heritability of OCD is 0.427 (se=0.093) and 0.174 (se=0.053) for ASD in these imputed data.
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) can be hugely disabling. Although very effective psychological treatments exist, many people delay years before seeking help or never seek treatment. There have been clinical observation and short questionnaire studies on why people delay, but little qualitative research exists on this complex subject. The present qualitative study aimed to identify the barriers to seeking treatment and the factors that encourage or push people to seek help for their OCD (positive and negative enablers).
A qualitative, exploratory study using in-depth, individual, semi-structured interviews was conducted by a researcher with personal experience of OCD.
Seventeen people with OCD, contacted through the charity OCD-UK, were interviewed about the factors that impacted on their decision to seek help or not. The interviews were analysed using thematic analysis.
Barriers identified were stigma, 'internal / cognitive' factors, not knowing what their problem was, factors relating to their GP or treatment, and fear of criminalisation. Positive enablers identified were being supported to seek help, information and personal accounts of OCD in the media, and confidence in their GP. Negative enablers were reaching a crisis point and for some participants (whose intrusive thoughts were about harming children) feeling driven to seek treatment because of the nature of the thoughts, that is, seeking help to prevent the 'harm' they feared they were capable of doing.
Participants identified a range of barriers and enablers that impacted on their decision to seek help or not. These give important indicators about the likely causes for delayed help seeking in OCD and ways in which people might be encouraged to seek help earlier.
People with OCD may face a wide range of barriers to seeking help, including concern about the reaction of health professionals. The level of awareness, kindness, and understanding shown by first-line practitioners can be very important to those seeking help. Acknowledging a person's journey prior to seeking help is likely to foster trust between therapist and patient. Some barriers to seeking help, for example, fear of criminalisation, may continue to have an important effect afterwards unless sensitively explored and understood.
Although Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) and Depression are classified as separate disorders, the high incidence of co-morbidity and the strong correlations between measures of each has led to debate about the nature of their relationship. Some authors have proposed that OCD is in fact a mood disorder while others have suggested that the two disorders are grounded in negative affectivity. A third proposition is that depression is an essential part of OCD but that OCD is a separate disorder from depression. The aim in this study was to investigate these diverse propositions in a non-clinical sample and also to determine whether factors implicated in each, that is anxious and depressive cognitions, hopelessness, and self-criticism, would demonstrate commonality as predictors of the symptoms of OCD and of depression. Two hundred participants (59% female) (<i>M</i> age = 34 years, <i>SD</i> = 16) completed the Padua Inventory, Carroll Rating Scale, Cognitions Checklist, Self-Criticism Scale, Beck Hopelessness Scale, Buss-Durkee Hostility Inventory-Revised and a Negative Affectivity Schedule. Results indicated a strong correlation between OCD and depression, depression, and negative affectivity but a weaker relationship between OCD and negative affectivity. Path analyses revealed that both anxious and depressive cognitions, as well as hostility predicted both disorders but the Beta-weights were stronger on OCD. Self-criticism predicted only depression while hopelessness failed to predict either disorder but was itself predicted by depressive cognitions. Depression was a stronger indicator of negative affect than OCD and while OCD positively predicted depression, depression was a negative indicator of OCD. These results support the hypothesis that OCD and depression are discrete disorders and indicate that while depression is implicated in OCD, the reverse does not hold. While both disorders are related to negative affectivity, this relationship is much stronger for depression thus failing to confirm that both are subsumed by a common factor, in this case, negative affectivity. The proposition that depression is part of OCD but that OCD is not necessarily implicated in depression and is, in fact, a separate disorder, is supported by the current model. Further research is required to support the utility of the model in clinical samples.
Bipolar disorder (BD) is considered to be a common comorbid condition in subjects with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), but there is limited literature on the prevalence of BD and its clinical correlates in those with a primary diagnosis of OCD.
We studied the prevalence of BD in a sample of consecutively registered outpatients attending a specialty OCD clinic in India over a period of 13 months. One hundred and seventy-one patients with a primary diagnosis of OCD were assessed systematically using structured and semi-structured instruments.
The prevalence of lifetime BD in OCD was 4%. The OCD + BD group had an episodic course of OCD and higher rate of lifetime suicide attempts.
BD may not be as highly prevalent in OCD as reported in literature. Those with OCD seem to have only a marginally higher risk for developing BD than the general population. A diagnosis of BD seems to have a pathoplastic effect on the course of OCD. Patients with OCD-BD comorbidity have to be specifically assessed for suicide risk.
This study reports follow-up 2 and 3 years after the initial assessment of a sample of youth with a primary diagnosis of OCD. Participants were 109 children and adolescents, aged 5-17 years, recruited from a specialized, outpatient OCD clinic in Sweden. Patients were treated with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), augmented when indicated by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). In cases where SSRIs were insufficient, augmentation with a second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) was applied. Participants were assessed with the Children's Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (CY-BOCS), Children's OCD Impact Scale (COIS), and Children's Depressive Inventory (CDI) at follow-ups 2 and 3 years after baseline assessment. Treatment response was defined as CY-BOCS total score ≤ 15, and remission was defined as CY-BOCS total score ≤ 10. Analyzing the outcomes with linear mixed-effects models (LME) showed a decrease in OCD symptom load from 23 to 6.9 at the 3-year follow-up. Moreover, two of three (66.1%) participants were in remission, and another 19.2% had responded to treatment at the 3-year follow-up. Thus, 85.3% of participants responded to treatment. Moreover, during the follow-up period, participants' psychosocial functioning had significantly improved, and depressive symptoms had significantly decreased. The results suggest that evidence-based treatment for pediatric OCD, following expert consensus guidelines, has long-term positive effects for most children and adolescents diagnosed with OCD. The results also indicate that improvements are maintained over a 3-year period, at least, and that improvement is also found with regard to psychosocial functioning and depressive symptoms.
Given that obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is associated with impaired quality of life (QoL) and functioning, it is important examine whether therapeutic recovery from OCD leads to improvements on these important secondary outcomes. Only a few studies have examined how measures of OCD symptom severity relate to QoL and functioning among patients receiving treatment for OCD.
OCD severity was measured with the Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised (OCI-R), a self-report scale of OCD, and the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS), an interview measure of OCD. Participants were 100 adults with a primary diagnosis of OCD on serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) enrolled in a randomized clinical trial comparing SRI augmentation with either exposure and response prevention (EX/RP) therapy, risperidone, or pill placebo. At baseline, mid-treatment, and post-treatment, patients completed assessments for OCD symptoms and QoL/functioning measures. Multilevel modeling was used to assess changes in QoL/functioning over the course of treatment and to compare such changes across treatment conditions.
Improvements in QoL/functioning were significantly greater among those receiving EX/RP compared to those receiving risperidone. Compared to pill placebo, EX/RP performed better on measures of functioning but not QoL. Greater improvement in individual OCI-R scores was associated with greater improvements in QoL/functioning, regardless of condition. In addition, Y-BOCS scores appeared to moderate improvements in QoL over the course of all treatment conditions, such that those with higher Y-BOCS scores showed the greatest improvements in QoL over time.
Improvements in QoL/functioning were associated with reduction in OCD symptom severity. The implications on OCD treatment and clinical research are discussed.
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) is an important cytokine and has been reported to be associated with the pathogenesis of many autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. TNF-α gene is located on a region that has been found to be associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). We performed this meta-analysis to assess the relationship between susceptibility to OCD and the TNF-α-238G/A gene polymorphism.
An extensive search of the available literature on the association between the susceptibility to OCD and the TNF gene polymorphism was conducted by searching PubMed, Web of Knowledge, Embase, Chinese Web of Knowledge, Wanfang, and Chongqing VIP database. The database was searched up to December 2016 and includes language of English and/or Chinese with the keywords of "obsessive-compulsive disorder" or "OCD," polymorphism or variant or mutation, "tumor necrosis factor" or "TNF" or "cytokine." The association between TNF-α-238G/A gene polymorphism and the susceptibility of OCD was anticipated by odds ratio (OR) with the corresponding 95% confidence interval (95% CI).
Four studies including 435 cases and 1073 controls were incorporated in our meta-analysis. In general, TNF-α-238G/A gene polymorphism might lead to a decreased risk of OCD susceptibility (G vs A genotype model: OR = 1.01, 95% CI = 0.37-2.77, P = .981; GG vs AA+AG model: OR = 0.93, 95% CI = 0.37-2.36, P = .879; GG+AG vs AA model: OR = 0.22, 95% CI = 0.06-0.73, P = .014; GG vs AA model: OR = 0.21, 95% CI = 0.06-0.71, P = .012; AG vs AA model: OR = 0.29, 95% CI = 0.07-1.16, P = .081; GG+AA vs AG model: OR = 1.17, 95% CI = 0.55-2.51, P = .683).
TNF-α-238G/A gene polymorphism might lead to a decreased risk of OCD susceptibility.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a distressing and often debilitating disorder characterized by obsessions, compulsions, or both that are time-consuming and cause impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning. There are many published studies reporting higher risk of suicidality in OCD patients, as well as studies describing increased risk of suicidality in OCD patients with other comorbid psychiatric conditions such as major depressive disorder (MDD) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Existing case reports on OCD with suicide as the obsessive component describe patients with long standing diagnosis of OCD with suicidal ideations or previous suicide attempts. This report describes the case of a 28-year-old male, who works as a first responder, who presented with new onset symptoms characteristic of MDD and PTSD, with no past history of OCD or suicidality who developed OCD with suicidal obsessions. Differentiating between suicidal ideation in the context of other psychiatric illnesses and suicidal obsessions in OCD is critical to ensuring accurate diagnosis and timely provision of most appropriate treatment. The combination of exposure and response prevention therapy and pharmacotherapy with sertraline and olanzapine was effective in helping the patient manage the anxiety and distress stemming from the patient's OCD with suicidal obsession.
A growing body of research suggests that the repetition of an action degrades memory for that action, as well as confidence that is has been done correctly. This has important implications for understanding the compulsive repetition of actions characteristic of obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). At this time, though, much of the research has been conducted on analogue or nonclinical OCD samples in comparison to healthy controls and often using virtual, as opposed to actual, threat stimuli. Furthermore, although it has been argued that people with OCD are overly attentive to threat stimuli, the research on actual attention to threat is scant.
People with a principal diagnosis of OCD (n = 30) and people with a clinically significant diagnosis of an anxiety disorder, but no OCD (n = 18) completed measures of memory confidence and responsibility and then underwent a stove-checking task in a functioning kitchen while wearing a portable eye tracking device. Pre- and post-task ratings of harm and responsibility were taken, along with post-task ratings of memory and certainty.
People with OCD did not exhibit poorer memory confidence than the anxious control (AC) group, but did report greater trait and state responsibility for harm. The OCD group checked longer than did the AC group and check duration predicted post-task ratings of harm, but to the same extent in both groups. People with OCD attended to threat items less than did the AC group. Greater visual attention to the stove during the checking period was associated with greater post-task ratings of responsibility and harm and with less certainty in and memory for the check - but only for the AC group.
The sample size was modest, women were over-represented and problems with the eye tracking device reduced the amount of reliable data available for analysis.
Compulsions are complex actions that are mediated by many trait, state and contextual factors. People with OCD may be able to circumvent self-perpetuating checking processes under certain circumstances. Future research should explore the factors that determine whether or not self-perpetuating mechanisms are activated.
Significant interest in the mechanistic underpinnings of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) has fueled research on the neural origins of compulsive behaviors. Converging clinical and preclinical evidence suggests that abnormal repetitive behaviors are driven by dysfunction in cortico-striatal-thalamic-cortical (CSTC) circuits. These findings suggest that compulsive behaviors arise, in part, from aberrant communication between lateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and dorsal striatum. An important body of work focused on the role of this network in OCD has been instrumental to progress in the field. Disease models focused primarily on these regions, however, fail to capture an important aspect of the disorder: affective dysregulation. High levels of anxiety are extremely prevalent in OCD, as is comorbidity with major depressive disorder. Furthermore, deficits in processing rewards and abnormalities in processing emotional stimuli are suggestive of aberrant encoding of affective information. Accordingly, OCD can be partially characterized as a disease in which behavioral selection is corrupted by exaggerated or dysregulated emotional states. This suggests that the networks producing OCD symptoms likely expand beyond traditional lateral OFC and dorsal striatum circuit models, and highlights the need to cast a wider net in our investigation of the circuits involved in generating and sustaining OCD symptoms. Here, we address the emerging role of medial OFC, amygdala, and ventral tegmental area projections to the ventral striatum (VS) in OCD pathophysiology. The VS receives strong innervation from these affect and reward processing regions, and is therefore poised to integrate information crucial to the generation of compulsive behaviors. Though it complements functions of dorsal striatum and lateral OFC, this corticolimbic-VS network is less commonly explored as a potential source of the pathology underlying OCD. In this review, we discuss this network's potential role as a locus of OCD pathology and effective treatment. 
Although disgust proneness has been implicated in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), there is a paucity of research examining change in disgust proneness during treatment as well as the correlates of such change, especially in children. This study examined the relationship between changes in disgust proneness and disorder-specific symptoms during residential treatment among youth with OCD, anxiety, and mood disorders. Youth ages 12-18 (n=472) completed pre- and post-outcome measures of OCD, anxiety, and mood symptoms and disgust proneness. Results indicate that although disgust proneness decreases during treatment for youth with OCD, anxiety, and mood disorders, youth with primary OCD experienced the greatest decrease in disgust proneness over the course of treatment. Reductions in disgust proneness during treatment were significantly correlated with reductions in multiple symptom measures, with the strongest correlations between reductions in disgust proneness and OCD symptoms. Implications and directions for future research are discussed.
In previous experiments, OCD washers did not differ significantly from controls in their initial level of activation in response to the potential threat of contamination; however, they were less able to reduce their activation by engaging in hand-washing, suggesting that the key problem in OCD is a faulty stopping mechanism. The main objectives of the present experiments were to develop a similar experimental paradigm for investigating checking behavior, and to use it to test the hypothesis that a faulty stopping mechanism also underlies OCD checking.
Participants sorted pills under the guise of beta testing a new medication system and then were given suggestions of the possibility of having made mistakes with potentially serious consequences. Later, participants engaged in a 90-s checking period and an unlimited period of checking. At baseline and three other times during the experiment, security motivation was measured with respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) and subjective ratings of confidence. Experiment 1 established the parameters of the paradigm in non-patient participants, and Experiment 2 contrasted OCD checkers with OCD washers and non-patients.
Results for both subjective and physiological measures of security motivation closely replicated previous findings for washing behavior. Groups did not differ significantly in initial activation, but the OCD checkers were unable to reduce their activation by engaging in period of checking that was ample for returning controls to baseline.
The sample size for the patient groups was modest.
These results lend further support to the security-motivation theory of OCD.
Research has suggested that the co-occurrence of PTSD in individuals with OCD is associated with more severe symptoms and less responsivity to empirically supported treatment as compared to individuals with OCD and no history of PTSD. However, much of this work has been limited by non-empirical case report design, cross-sectional and retrospective analyses, or small sample sizes. The current study extended this research by comparing the clinical characteristics of individuals with OCD with and without a lifetime PTSD diagnosis in a large, naturalistic, longitudinal sample over the course of seven years. At baseline, individuals with comorbid lifetime PTSD reported significantly more severe symptoms of OCD (including symptom levels and insight), lower quality of life, and higher rates of comorbid lifetime mood and substance use disorders than participants without lifetime PTSD. Further, individuals with comorbid OCD and lifetime PTSD reported significantly more severe OCD symptoms over the course of seven years than those without lifetime PTSD. These results are largely consistent with the existing literature and support the need to consider PTSD symptoms in the assessment and treatment of OCD.
Hoarding is common among youth with obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), with up to 26% of OCD youth exhibiting hoarding symptoms. Recent evidence from adult hoarding and OCD cohorts suggests that hoarding symptoms are associated with executive functioning deficits similar to those observed in subjects with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). However, while hoarding behavior often onsets during childhood, there is little information about executive function deficits and ADHD in affected children and adolescents. The study sample included 431 youths (ages 6-17 years) diagnosed with OCD who participated in the OCD Collaborative Genetics Study and the OCD Collaborative Genetics Association Study and completed a series of clinician-administered and parent report assessments, including diagnostic interviews and measures of executive functioning (Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Functioning; BRIEF) and hoarding severity (Hoarding Rating Scale-Interview; HRS-I). 113 youths (26%) had clinically significant levels of hoarding compulsions. Youths with and without hoarding differed significantly on most executive functioning subdomains and composite indices as measured by the parent-rated BRIEF. Groups did not differ in the frequency of full DSM-IV ADHD diagnoses; however, the hoarding group had significantly greater number of inattention and hyperactivity symptoms compared to the non-hoarding group. In multivariate models, we found that overall BRIEF scores were related to hoarding severity, adjusting for age, gender and ADHD symptoms. These findings suggest an association between hoarding and executive functioning deficits in youths with OCD, and assessing executive functioning may be important for investigating the etiology and treatment of children and adolescents with hoarding and OCD.
Prior research has shown that youth with co-occurring tic disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) may differ from those with non-tic-related OCD in terms of clinical characteristics and treatment responsiveness. A broad definition of "tic-related" was used to examine whether children with tics in the Pediatric OCD Treatment Study II differed from those without tics in terms of demographic and phenomenological characteristics and acute treatment outcomes.
Participants were 124 youth aged 7 to 17 years, inclusive, with a primary diagnosis of OCD who were partial responders to an adequate serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI) trial. Participants were randomized to medication management, medication management plus instructions in cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), or medication management plus full CBT. Tic status was based on the presence of motor and/or vocal tics on the Yale Global Tic Severity Scale.
Tics were identified in 53% of the sample. Those with tic-related OCD did not differ from those with non-tic-related OCD in terms of age, family history of tics, OCD severity, OCD-related impairment, or comorbidity. Those with tics responded equally in all treatment conditions.
Tic-related OCD was very prevalent using a broad definition of tic status. Results suggest that youth with this broad definition of tic-related OCD do not have increased OCD severity or inference, higher comorbidity rates or severity, or worsened functioning, and support the use of CBT in this population. This highlights the importance of not making broad assumptions about OCD symptoms most likely to occur in an individual with comorbid tics. Clinical trial registration information-Treatment of Pediatric OCD for SRI Partial Responders; http://clinicaltrials.gov; NCT00074815.
Randomised and sham-controlled trials (RCTs) of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have yielded conflicting results, which may be due to the variability in rTMS parameters used. We performed an updated systematic review and meta-analysis on the effectiveness of rTMS for the treatment of OCD and aimed to determine whether certain rTMS parameters, such as cortical target, may be associated with higher treatment effectiveness. After conducting a systematic literature review for RCTs on rTMS for OCD through to 1 December 2016 using MEDLINE, PubMed, Web of Science, PsycINFO, Google, and Google Scholar, we performed a random-effects meta-analysis with the outcome measure as pre-post changes in Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) scores. To determine whether rTMS parameters may have influenced treatment effectiveness, studies were further analysed according to cortical target, stimulation frequency, and length of follow-up. Data were obtained from 18 RCTs on rTMS in the treatment of OCD. Overall, rTMS yielded a modest effect in reducing Y-BOCS scores with Hedge's g of 0.79 (95% CI = 0.43-1.15, p < 0.001). Stimulation of the supplementary motor area yielded the greatest reductions in Y-BOCS scores relative to other cortical targets. Subgroup analyses suggested that low frequency rTMS was more effective than high frequency rTMS. The effectiveness of rTMS was also greater at 12 weeks follow-up than at four weeks follow-up. Our meta-analysis implies that low frequency rTMS applied over the supplementary motor area may offer the greatest effectiveness in the treatment of OCD. The therapeutic effects of rTMS also appear to persist post-treatment and may offer beneficial long-term effectiveness. With our findings, it is suggested that future large-scale studies focus on the supplementary motor area and include follow-up periods of 12 weeks or more.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a neuropsychiatric disorder with 1-3% prevalence. OCD is characterized by recurrent thoughts (obsessions) and repetitive behaviors (compulsions). The pathophysiology of OCD remains unclear, stressing the importance of pre-clinical studies. The aim of this article is to critically review a proposed animal model of OCD that is characterized by the induction of compulsive checking and behavioral sensitization to the D2/D3 dopamine agonist quinpirole. Changes in this model have been reported at the level of brain structures, neurotransmitter systems and other neurophysiological aspects. In this review, we consider these alterations in relation to the clinical manifestations in OCD, with the aim to discuss and evaluate axes of validity of this model. Our analysis shows that some axes of validity of quinpirole sensitization model (QSM) are strongly supported by clinical findings, such as behavioral phenomenology or roles of brain structures. Evidence on predictive validity is contradictory and ambiguous. It is concluded that this model is useful in the context of searching for the underlying pathophysiological basis of the disorder because of the relatively strong biological similarities with OCD.
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is a chronic and disabling disorder with poor response to pharmacological treatments. Converging evidences suggest that OCD patients suffer from dysfunction of the cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuit, including in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC).
To examine whether modulation of mPFC-ACC activity by deep transcranial magnetic stimulation (DTMS) affects OCD symptoms.
Treatment resistant OCD participants were treated with either high-frequency (HF; 20 Hz), low-frequency (LF; 1 Hz), or sham DTMS of the mPFC and ACC for five weeks, in a double-blinded manner. All treatments were administered following symptoms provocation, and EEG measurements during a Stroop task were acquired to examine changes in error-related activity. Clinical response to treatment was determined using the Yale-Brown-Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (YBOCS).
Interim analysis revealed that YBOCS scores were significantly improved following HF (n = 7), but not LF stimulation (n = 8), compared to sham (n = 8), and thus recruitment for the LF group was terminated. Following completion of the study, the response rate in the HF group (n = 18) was significantly higher than that of the sham group (n = 15) for at least one month following the end of the treatment. Notably, the clinical response in the HF group correlated with increased Error Related Negativity (ERN) in the Stroop task, an electrophysiological component that is attributed to ACC activity.
HF DTMS over the mPFC-ACC alleviates OCD symptoms and may be used as a novel therapeutic intervention. Notwithstanding alternative explanations, this may stem from DTMS ability to directly modify ACC activity.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by recurrent obtrusive and repetitive acts typically occurred following anxiety. In the last two decades, studies done on the gene sequences, large-scale and point mutations and gene-gene, gene-environment and gene-drug interactions have led to the discovery of hundreds of genes associated with OCD. Although each gene in turn is a part of the etiology of this disorder; however, OCD, like other mental disorders is complex and a comprehensive and integrated view is necessary to understand its genetic basis. In this study, through an extensive review of existing published studies, all genes associated with OCD were found. Then, in order to integrate the results, all the interactions between these genes were explored and the achievement was represented as an interactive genetic network. Furthermore, the reconstructed network was analyzed. It was found that GRIN2A, GRIN2B and GRIA2 are the most central nodes in the network. Functional and pathway enrichment analysis showed that glutamate-related pathways are the main deficient systems in patients with OCD. By studying genes shared between OCD and other diseases, it was cleared that OCD, epilepsy and some types of cancer have the most number of shared genes. The results of this study, in addition to reviewing the available results as a comprehensive and integrated manner, provide new hypotheses for future studies.
The development and evaluation of Internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (iCBT) interventions provides a potential solution for current limitations in the acceptability, availability, and accessibility of mental health care for young people with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Preliminary results support the effectiveness of therapist-assisted iCBT for young people with OCD; however, no previous studies have examined the effectiveness of completely self-guided iCBT for OCD in young people.
We aimed to conduct a preliminary evaluation of the effectiveness of the OCD? Not Me! program for reducing OCD-related psychopathology in young people (12-18 years). This program is an eight-stage, completely self-guided iCBT treatment for OCD, which is based on exposure and response prevention.
These data were early and preliminary results of a longer study in which an open trial design is being used to evaluate the effectiveness of the OCD? Not Me!
Participants were required to have at least subclinical levels of OCD to be offered the online program. Participants with moderate-high suicide/self-harm risk or symptoms of eating disorder or psychosis were not offered the program. OCD symptoms and severity were measured at pre- and posttest, and at the beginning of each stage of the program. Data was analyzed using generalized linear mixed models.
A total of 334 people were screened for inclusion in the study, with 132 participants aged 12 to 18 years providing data for the final analysis. Participants showed significant reductions in OCD symptoms (P<.001) and severity (P<.001) between pre- and posttest.
These preliminary results suggest that fully automated iCBT holds promise as a way of increasing access to treatment for young people with OCD; however, further research needs to be conducted to replicate the results and to determine the feasibility of the program.
Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ANZCTR): ACTRN12613000152729; https://www.anzctr.org.au/Trial/Registration/TrialReview.aspx?id=363654 (Archived by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/ 6iD7EDFqH).
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by impaired sensorimotor gating, as measured using prepulse inhibition (PPI). This effect may be related to abnormalities in the serotonin (5-HT) system. 5-HT1B agonists can impair PPI, produce OCD-like behaviors in animals, and exacerbate OCD symptoms in humans. We measured 5-HT1B receptor availability using (11)C-P943 positron emission tomography (PET) in unmedicated, non-depressed OCD patients (n=12) and matched healthy controls (HC; n=12). Usable PPI data were obtained from 20 of these subjects (10 from each group). There were no significant main effects of OCD diagnosis on 5-HT1B receptor availability ((11)C-P943 BPND); however, the relationship between PPI and (11)C-P943 BPND differed dramatically and significantly between groups. 5-HT1B receptor availability in the basal ganglia and thalamus correlated positively with PPI in controls; these correlations were lost or even reversed in the OCD group. In cortical regions there were no significant correlations with PPI in controls, but widespread positive correlations in OCD patients. Positive correlations between 5-HT1B receptor availability and PPI were consistent across diagnostic groups only in two structures, the orbitofrontal cortex and the amygdala. Differential associations of 5-HT1B receptor availability with PPI in patients suggest functionally important alterations in the serotonergic regulation of cortical/subcortical balance in OCD. 
The aim of this study was to assess the reliability of preoperative MRI for the staging of osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) lesions of the knee and the talus in juvenile patients, using arthroscopy as the gold standard of diagnosis.
Sixty-three juvenile patients (range 8-16 years) with an OCD of the knee or the talus underwent arthroscopy after MRI. In 54/9 out of 63 cases, 1.5/3 T MR scanners were used. The OCD stage was classified according the staging criteria of Dipaola et al. Arthroscopic findings were compared with MRI reports in each patient.
From the 63 juvenile patients, MRI/arthroscopy revealed a stage I OCD in 4/19 patients, stage II in 31/22 patients, stage III in 22/9 patients and stage IV in 6/6 patients. No osteochondral pathology was evident in arthroscopy in seven out of 63 patients. The overall accuracy of preoperative MRI in staging an OCD lesion of the knee or the talus was 41.3%. In 33 out of 63 patients (52.4%), arthroscopy revealed a lower OCD stage than in the preoperative MRI grading, and in four out of 63 cases (6.4%), the intraoperative arthroscopic grading was worse than in preoperative MRI prior to surgery. The utilization of the 3 T MRI provided a correct diagnosis with 44.4%.
Even with today's modern MRI scanners, it is not possible to predict an accurate OCD stage in children. The children's orthopaedist should not solely rely on the MRI when it comes to the decision to further conservative or surgical treatment of a juvenile OCD, but rather should take surgical therapy in consideration within persisting symptoms despite a low OCD stage provided by MRI.
III.
We investigated whether adverse attachment experience might contribute to the development of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). We interviewed 100 adolescents, 25 each with primary OCD, depressive disorder (DD), OCD plus DD and general population controls (CTRs) using the adult attachment interview to assess attachment experiences (AEs), including traumatic and adverse AE (TAE). Adolescents with OCD, OCD+DD and DD had little evidence of secure base/safe haven parental behaviour and their childhood attachment needs judged to be rejected as compared to the controls. Overprotection was not characteristic of OCD, and parents using the child for their own needs (elevated levels of involving/role reversal) occurred only in DD, with low levels in OCD, OCD+DD and CTR. Traumatic experiences, often multiple, and/or attachment related were reported significantly more often in the DD group, and was less common in OCD+DD, CTR and particularly in the OCD group. In OCD, little TAE was reported and adverse AE were less serious and seem unlikely to contribute directly to OCD aetiology. In DD and to some degree in OCD+DD serious AE/TAE may have some etiological significance for the depressive states. 
Family accommodation in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by myriad behaviors, such as modifying family routines, facilitating avoidance, and engaging in compulsions to reduce obsessional distress. It has been linked to various deleterious outcomes including increased functional impairment and poorer treatment response for OCD. Although extant literature suggests a linear relationship between family accommodation and OCD symptom severity, the magnitude and statistical significance of this association has been inconsistent across studies, indicating that moderators may be influencing this relationship. The present study examined this relationship using meta-analytic techniques, and investigated sample-dependent (age, gender, comorbid anxiety/mood disorders) and methodological (administration method and number of items used in family accommodation measure, informant type, sample size, publication year) moderators. Forty-one studies were included in the present meta-analysis, and the overall effect size (ES) for the correlation between family accommodation and OCD symptom severity was moderate (r=.42). Moderator analyses revealed that the number of items on the family accommodation scale moderated the ES. No other sample-dependent or methodological characteristics emerged as moderators. In addition to being the first systematic examination of family accommodation moderators, these results highlight the moderate relationship between family accommodation and OCD severity that is influenced by measurement scales. Findings may be used to guide clinical care and inform future investigations by providing a more nuanced understanding of family accommodation in OCD. 
In order to identifying somatoform symptoms profiles, classifying study population and evaluating of psychological disorders in extracted classes, we carried out a cross-sectional study on 4762 Iranian adults. Somatoform symptoms were assessed using a comprehensive 30-items questionnaire and psychological disorders were evaluated by 12-item General Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12) and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) questionnaires. Factor analysis and factor mixture modeling (FMM) were used for data analysis. Four somatoform symptoms profiles were extracted, including 'psycho-fatigue', 'gastrointestinal', 'neuro- skeletal' and 'pharyngeal-respiratory'. According to FMM results, a two-class four-factor structure, based somatoform symptoms, was identified in our study population. Two identified classes were labeled as "low psycho-fatigue complaints" and "high psycho-fatigue complaints". The scores of psychological disorders profile was significantly associated with four somatoform symptoms profiles in both classes; however the stronger relationship was observed in high psycho-fatigue complaints class. The prevalence of all the somatoform symptoms among participants assigned to the "high psycho-fatigue complaints" class was significantly higher than other class. We concluded that somatoform symptoms have a dimensional-categorical structure within our study population. Our study also provided informative pathways on the association of psychological disorders with somatoform symptoms. These findings could be useful for dealing with treatment's approaches.
Psychological disorders have been proven to be associated with poor physiological, psychological and immune outcomes in cancer patients. However, despite of many challenges of the changed self-image/body image and the altered sexual/urinary function, relatively little is known about psychological disorders of patients with newly diagnosed bladder and kidney cancer. We aimed to investigate the prevalence of depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and the associated psychosocial factors among bladder/kidney cancer patients.
A cross-sectional study was conducted of consecutive inpatients with bladder/kidney cancer in the First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University in Liaoning Province, northeast China. A total of 489 early-stage cancer patients eligible for this study completed questionnaires on demographic and clinical variables, depression, anxiety, PTSD, perceived social support and positive psychological variables (hope, optimism and resilience) anonymously during October 2013 and August 2014. Hierarchical regression analysis was used to examine the relationships between psychosocial resources and psychological disorders, while controlling for possible covariates.
The prevalence of depression, anxiety and PTSD was 77.5%, 69.3% and 25.2%, respectively, while 24.9% of patients had psychological co-morbidity. Psychosocial resources together explained more than one-third of the variance on psychological disorders. Under standardized estimate (β) sequence, patient's perception of social support from family was significantly associated with depression, anxiety and PTSD (p < 0.01). Optimism and resilience showed integrated and independent effects on psychological disorders, and hope represented the significant association with PTSD only (p < 0.01).
The high prevalence of psychological disorders in newly diagnosed patients with early-stage bladder/kidney cancer should receive more attention in Chinese medical settings. Additionally, in consideration of the different protective effects of psychosocial resources, the present study demonstrated that one complete psychological intervention integrating the associated psychosocial factors are necessary to ameliorate psychological disorders so as to provide patients with a more holistic cancer care.
Cognitive failures are errors in normal everyday functioning. Individuals with psychological disorders may possess heightened vulnerability. We sought to review the literature on cognitive failures in psychological disorders to determine the nature of this association, and whether failures relate to neuropsychological performance. We also examine the relationship between cognitive failures and substance use since it is relevant to everyday cognition and co-occurs in many psychological disorders.
We conducted a systematic review of self-reported cognitive failures in psychological disorders and substance use, identifying 21 papers in total.
Papers identified studied trauma, mood, and anxiety disorders, and schizophrenia. Substance use papers included nicotine, alcohol, cannabis, and ecstasy use. Cognitive failures were increased in some but not all papers; the most consistent findings were for depression, PTSD, and daily smokers of nicotine. Subjective failures did not correlate closely with neuropsychological outcomes in any disorders. We were unable to discern distinct profiles of failures for each disorder; rather they may reflect emotional dysregulation more broadly.
The real world cognitive experiences of people with psychological disorders may differ to their performance in the clinic or lab. It is important that self-reports of minor cognitive issues are considered as both a potential risk and a maintaining factor of illness. Substance use also needs to be considered in assessing cognitive failures.
While research in the area of e-mental health has received considerable attention over the last decade, there are still many areas that have not been addressed. One such area is the comorbidity of psychological disorders in a Web-based sample using online assessment and diagnostic tools, and the relationships between comorbidities and psychosocial variables.
We aimed to identify comorbidities of psychological disorders of an online sample using an online diagnostic tool. Based on diagnoses made by an automated online assessment and diagnostic system administered to a large group of online participants, multiple comorbidities (co-occurrences) of 21 psychological disorders for males and females were identified. We examined the relationships between dyadic comorbidities of anxiety and depressive disorders and the psychosocial variables sex, age, suicidal ideation, social support, and quality of life.
An online complex algorithm based on the criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition, Text Revision, was used to assign primary and secondary diagnoses of 21 psychological disorders to 12,665 online participants. The frequency of co-occurrences of psychological disorders for males and females were calculated for all disorders. A series of hierarchical loglinear analyses were performed to examine the relationships between the dyadic comorbidities of depression and various anxiety disorders and the variables suicidal ideation, social support, quality of life, sex, and age.
A 21-by-21 frequency of co-occurrences of psychological disorders matrix revealed the presence of multiple significant dyadic comorbidities for males and females. Also, for those with some of the dyadic depression and the anxiety disorders, the odds for having suicidal ideation, reporting inadequate social support, and poorer quality of life increased for those with two-disorder comorbidity than for those with only one of the same two disorders.
Comorbidities of several psychological disorders using an online assessment tool within a Web-based population were similar to those found in face-to-face clinics using traditional assessment tools. Results provided support for the transdiagnostic approaches and confirmed the positive relationship between comorbidity and suicidal ideation, the negative relationship between comorbidity and social support, and the negative relationship comorbidity and quality of life.
Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry ACTRN121611000704998; http://www.anzctr.org.au/trial_view.aspx?ID=336143 (Archived by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/618r3wvOG).
This study was performed to examine the comorbidity risks between psychological disorders, such as depression, and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) using nationally representative data from a National Sample Cohort of the National Health Insurance Service in Korea.The National Health Insurance Service-National Sample Cohort (NHIS-NSC) database from 2010 to 2012 was used in this study. GERD patients were defined as those diagnosed with specific tests, with screened medication, and without any other gastrointestinal diseases. Propensity score matching for age, sex, and economic status was applied to form a control cohort. Incidence rate, relative risks, Cox proportional-hazards modeling, and Kaplan-Meier analysis were applied to examine the differences between the GERD and control cohorts with regard to the risk of subsequent psychological disorders.The results showed that patients in the GERD cohort (n = 9503) had significantly higher risks of psychological disorders than those without GERD (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 1.25, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.07-1.47, P = .006). Specifically, the risk of depressive disorder was significantly higher for patients in the GERD cohort than in the control cohort (adjusted HR 1.41, 95% CI 1.04-1.91, P = .027). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the estimated probability of psychological disorders was significantly higher in the GERD cohort compared with the control cohort (log-rank test, P = .007).This study suggested that GERD may be a risk factor for subsequent psychological disorders, specifically, depressive disorder. The results of this study in GERD patients compared with non-GERD patients in Korea suggested that psychological disorders and GERD may be inter-related.
To conduct a prospective study of the occurrence of psychological disorders and comorbidities after spinal cord injury (SCI), determine psychotropic medication usage, and establish predictors of psychological disorders after transition to the community.
Longitudinal design with multiple measures.
Assessment occurred in SCI units and the community.
Adults with SCI (N=88) admitted over a period of 32 months into 3 SCI units.
Participants completed inpatient rehabilitation for an acute SCI. Longitudinal assessment occurred up to 6 months postdischarge.
Measures were chosen that had a theoretical and clinical foundation for contributing to recovery after SCI. The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview, a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview, was conducted to determine the presence of psychological disorders. Medical measures included severity of secondary conditions or complications. Psychological measures included measures of anxiety and depressive mood, resilience, pain catastrophization, self-efficacy, and cognitive capacity.
Rates of psychological disorders of 17% to 25% were substantially higher than rates found in the Australian community. The occurrence of psychological disorder comorbidities was also very high. Anxiety was significantly elevated in those with a psychological disorder. Psychotropic medications were prescribed to more than 36% of the sample, with most being antidepressants. Factors predictive of psychological disorders included years of education, premorbid psychiatric/psychological treatment, cognitive impairment, secondary complications, resilience, and anxiety.
SCI can have a substantial negative impact on mental health that does not change up to 6 months postdischarge. Findings suggest a substantial minority experience increased psychosocial distress after the injury and after transitioning into the community. Additional resources should be invested in improving the mental health of adults with SCI.
Focusing on the mother's postpartum psychological and psychiatric disorders.
Bibliographic research carried out by the data banks and the recommendations of learned societies from the following French words translated into English: postpartum, perinatal, postpartum, breastfeeding, birth, weaning, peripartum, lactation, postnatal, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, depression, anxiety, psychosis. These keywords were combined with the following words: prevalence, incidence, recurrence, development, identification, scale, assessment, test, father, man, husband, partner, hormones, treatment, intervention, prevention, testing, therapy, medicine, medication, to prescribe, prescription.
The months following the birth are a transitional period, and psychological alterations concern all parents (LE2). It is more difficult in case of psychosocial risk factors (LE2). In situations of proven psychological difficulties, the impact on the psycho-emotional development of children can be important (LE3). Among these difficulties, postpartum depression is the most common situation. Given its prevalence (about 13 %) and because of its implications for the entire family, it's an important health issue (LE2). However, the risk is generally higher in the perinatal period for all mental disorders (LE3). Pregnancy and postpartum are periods favorable to develop links with health professionals. New parents are often looking for support to deal with the upheavals associated with the birth. The postpartum period is thus for clinicians a unique opportunity to address the mental, social and somatic aspects of the health of their patients (professional agreement). Early detection and treatment of mental disorders are essential for family functioning and parent-child relationship (professional agreement).
The issue of screening and prevention of postpartum mental disorders is fundamental and requires involvement of all professional receiving parents and babies in the aftermath of the birth.
As there were a few studies on the mental disorders resulting from diabetes in children, this study aimed at investigating the prevalence of psychological disorders among children.
We enrolled 323 children with diabetes type 1 aged 5-12 yr old referring to Endocrinology Clinic of Mofid Hospital, Tehran, Iran in 2014-2015. In addition, 317 healthy children were considered as control group. The materials used for data analysis were information form and questionnaire CSI-4 filled out by their parents. The filled questionnaires were rated in that day and then analyzed and diagnosed by the Pediatric Psychiatrist in order to determine the type and intensity of psychological disorder. Results were analyzed using SPSS 20. <i>T</i> tests, Scheffe post hoc test and Pearson's correlation test were used for analysis of data. The amounts were significantly different at <i>P</i><0.05.
In terms of Neuro-Evolutionary disorders, Attention-deficit (ADD), hyperactivity (HD) and Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorders (ADHD) in children with diabetes were significantly higher than those in healthy children (<i>P</i>=0.001). Severe fundamental depressive disorders were higher in diabetic children (<i>P</i>=0.001). In terms of anxiety disorder, a specific phobia and panic was significantly higher in diabetic children (<i>P</i>=0.005). Regarding aggressive behaviors, diabetic children were more disobedient and stubborn than the others.
The prevalence of psychological disorders among diabetic children was higher than that of the others. As psychological disorders will effect on the life quality of children, improvement of life quality of diabetic children and adolescents, on-time diagnosis and treatment of psychological disorders in these patients seems essential.
We performed a narrative review about psychological disorders in adults with Takotsubo syndrome and inherited cardiomyopathies. Through the electronic database PubMed and PsycINFO we searched all relevant related manuscripts published between 2000 and 2015. We found twelve studies that explore psychological disorders in Takotsubo syndrome and eight about inherited cardiomyopathies: five enrolled patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, two dilated cardiomyopathy, and one arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. All papers reported the presence of psychological disorders. In Takotsubo syndrome, depression fluctuates between 20.5 and 48% and anxiety was present among 26 and 56%. A study reported that anxiety increases the probability of developing Takotsubo syndrome. In dilated cardiomyopathy, anxiety was present in 50% and depression in 22%. In arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, younger age, poorer functional capacity and having experienced at least one implantable cardioverter defibrillator shock, were significant independent predictors of both device-specific and generalized anxiety. In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, anxiety and depression were present in 45.2% and 17.9%, respectively. Thirty seven percent met diagnostic criteria for anxiety disorders and 21% for mood disorders. Nearby half hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients report triggering of chest pain, dyspnea, and dizziness by emotional stress. Due to the small number of studies, conclusions are limited. However, we discuss some results. 
A relative newcomer to the field of psychology, e-mental health has been gaining momentum and has been given considerable research attention. Although several aspects of e-mental health have been studied, 1 aspect has yet to receive attention: the structure of comorbidity of psychological disorders and their relationships with measures of psychosocial adjustment including suicidal ideation in online samples.
This exploratory study attempted to identify the structure of comorbidity of 21 psychological disorders assessed by an automated online electronic psychological assessment screening system (e-PASS). The resulting comorbidity factor scores were then used to assess the association between comorbidity factor scores and measures of psychosocial adjustments (ie, psychological distress, suicidal ideation, adequate social support, self-confidence in dealing with mental health issues, and quality of life).
A total of 13,414 participants were assessed using a complex online algorithm that resulted in primary and secondary Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition, Text Revision) diagnoses for 21 psychological disorders on dimensional severity scales. The scores on these severity scales were used in a principal component analysis (PCA) and the resulting comorbidity factor scores were related to 4 measures of psychosocial adjustments.
A PCA based on 17 of the 21 psychological disorders resulted in a 4-factor model of comorbidity: anxiety-depression consisting of all anxiety disorders, major depressive episode (MDE), and insomnia; substance abuse consisting of alcohol and drug abuse and dependency; body image-eating consisting of eating disorders, body dysmorphic disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorders; depression-sleep problems consisting of MDE, insomnia, and hypersomnia. All comorbidity factor scores were significantly associated with psychosocial measures of adjustment (P<.001). They were positively related to psychological distress and suicidal ideation, but negatively related to adequate social support, self-confidence, and quality of life.
This exploratory study identified 4 comorbidity factors in the e-PASS data and these factor scores significantly predicted 5 psychosocial adjustment measures.
Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry ACTRN121611000704998; http://www.anzctr.org.au/trial_view.aspx?ID=336143 (Archived by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/618r3wvOG).
There is a growing understanding of the prevalence and impact of psychological disorders on COPD. However, the role of these disorders in early readmission is unclear.
We analyzed data from 5% fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries diagnosed with COPD (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision code, 491.xx, 492.xx, 493.xx, and 496.xx) between 2001 and 2011 who were hospitalized with a primary discharge diagnosis of COPD or a primary discharge diagnosis of respiratory failure (518.xx and 799.1) with secondary diagnosis of COPD. We hypothesized that such psychological disorders as depression, anxiety, psychosis, alcohol abuse, and drug abuse are independently associated with an increased risk of 30-day readmission in patients hospitalized for COPD.
Between 2001 and 2011, 135,498 hospitalizations occurred for COPD in 80,088 fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries. Of these, 30,218 (22.30%) patients had one or more psychological disorders. In multivariate analyses, odds of 30-day readmission were higher in patients with COPD who had depression (OR, 1.34; 95% CI, 1.29-1.39), anxiety (OR, 1.43; 95% CI, 1.37-1.50), psychosis (OR, 1.18; 95% CI, 1.10-1.27), alcohol abuse (OR, 1.30; 95% CI, 1.15-1.47), and drug abuse (OR, 1.29; 95% CI, 1.11-1.50) compared with those who did not have these disorders. These psychological disorders increased amount of variation in 30-day readmission attributed to patient characteristics by 37%.
Psychological disorders like depression, anxiety, psychosis, alcohol abuse, and drug abuse are independently associated with higher all-cause 30-day readmission rates for Medicare beneficiaries with COPD.
Mental disorders affect a great number of people worldwide. Four out of the 10 leading causes of disability in the world are mental disorders. Because of the scarcity of specialists around the world and especially in developing countries, it is important for primary care physicians to provide services to patients with mental disorders. The most widely researched and used psychological approach in primary care is cognitive behavioral therapy. Due to its brief nature and the practical skills it teaches, it is convenient for use in primary care settings. The following paper reviews the literature on psychotherapy in primary care and provides some practical tips for primary care physicians to use when they are faced with patients having mental disorders. 
Most mental health services throughout the world currently regard evidence-based psychological treatments as best practice for the treatment of mental disorders. The aim of this study was to analyze evidence-based treatments drawn from RCTs, reviews, meta-analyses, guides, and lists provided by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), Division 12 (Clinical Psychology) of the American Psychological Association (APA), Cochrane and the Australian Psychological Society (APS) in relation to mental disorders in adults. A total of 135 treatments were analyzed for 23 mental disorders and compared to determine the level of agreement among the organizations. The results indicate that, in most cases, there is little agreement among organizations and that there are several discrepancies within certain disorders. These results require reflection on the meaning attributed to evidence-based practice with regard to psychological treatments. The possible reasons for these differences are discussed. Based on these findings, proposals to unify the criteria that reconcile the realities of clinical practice with a scientific perspective were analyzed.
Mental disorders affect a great number of people worldwide. Four out of the 10 leading causes of disability in the world are mental disorders. Because of the scarcity of specialists around the world and especially in developing countries, it is important for primary care physicians to provide services to patients with mental disorders. The most widely researched and used psychological approach in primary care is cognitive behavioral therapy. Due to its brief nature and the practical skills it teaches, it is convenient for use in primary care settings. The following paper reviews the literature on psychotherapy in primary care and provides some practical tips for primary care physicians to use when they are faced with patients having mental disorders.
To summarise and discuss the association between telomerase activity and psychological stress, mental disorders and lifestyle factors.
A systematic review was carried out to identify prospective or retrospective studies and interventions published up to June 2015 that reported associations between telomerase activity and psychological stress, mental disorders and lifestyle factors. Electronic data bases of PubMed, ProQuest, CINAHL and Google Scholar were searched.
Twenty six studies on humans measured telomerase activity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) or leukocytes and examined its association with psychological stress, mental disorders and lifestyle factors. Of those studies, three reported significantly decreased telomerase activity in individuals under chronic psychological stress. Interestingly, one of the three studies found that acute laboratory psychological stress significantly increased telomerase activity. Nine studies reported mixed results on association between mental disorders and telomerase activity. Of the nine studies, five reported that major depressive disorder (MDD) was associated with significantly increased telomerase activity. In thirteen out of fourteen studies on lifestyle factors, it was reported that physical exercise, diet micronutrient supplementation, mindfulness meditation, Qigong practice or yoga mediation resulted in increase in telomerase activity. In addition, two studies on animal models showed that depression-like behaviour was associated with decreased hippocampus telomerase activity. Five animal studies showed that physical exercise increased telomerase activity by cell-type-specific and genotype-specific manners.
Although multi-facet results were reported on the association between telomerase activity and psychological stress, mental disorders and lifestyle factors, there were some consistent findings in humans such as (1) decreased telomerase activity in individuals under chronic stress, (2) increased telomerase activity in individuals with MDD, and (3) increased telomerase activity in individuals under lifestyle interventions. Animal studies showed that physical exercise increased telomerase activity in specific cell-types. However, the exact mechanisms for the changes in telomerase activity have not been elucidated. We propose conglomerate models connecting chronic psychological stress, depression, mediation and physical exercise to telomerase activation. Several areas for future research are suggested.
The Influence of Media Consumption During Early Childhood on Media Use and Psychological Disorders in Adolescence There are many studies that suggest that there is a link between high media consumption and psychological, physiological and social disorders. Nevertheless, there are also inconsistent results, methodical limitations and a lack of longitudinal studies. The present study analyses habits of media consumption in children and adolescents, the influence of different early childhood risk factors on the use of the media in adolescence and the links between early childhood media consumption and disorders in adolescence. The source of the data is the longitudinal project Future Family III. 249 families participated in the last data collection in the adolescence. Adolescents use the media more than five hours per day on average, nearly fifty percent of these adolescents can be considered as internet addicted and a majority consumes violent contents. A low socioeconomic status, low socio-emotional competences and low intelligence of the child as well as unfavorable educational style and psychological stress of the mother are risk factors for the media use in adolescence. Adolescents with a migration background have an increased risk of internet and computer game dependency. On the other hand, the overall utilization of media in the early childhood has only a low predictive power. The results indicate that these connections seem to be more complex than assumed. There is a need for more longitudinal studies in order to get a better understanding of the consequences of media consumption.
To discuss how the educational status, burn area and coping behaviors influence the psychological disorders in severely burned patients.
Sixty-four severely burned patients hospitalized in Guangzhou Red Cross Hospital, Guangdong Provincial Work Injury Rehabilitation Center, and Guangdong General Hospital were enrolled with cluster random sampling method. Data of their demography and situation of burns were collected. Then their coping behavior, psychological disorders including anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) plus its core symptoms of flashback, avoidance, and hypervigilance were assessed by medical coping modes questionnaire, self-rating anxiety scale (SAS), self-rating depression scale (SDS), PTSD checklist-civilian version (PCL-C) respectively. Correlation was analyzed between demography, burn area, coping behavior and psychological disorders. The predictive powers of educational status, burn area and coping behaviors on the psychological disorders were analyzed. The qualitative variables were assigned values. Data were processed with t test, Spearman rank correlation analysis, and multiple linear regression analysis.
(1) The patients scored (19.0 ± 3.4) points in confrontation coping behavior, which showed no statistically significant difference from the domestic norm score (19.5 ± 3.8) points (t = -1.13, P > 0.05). The patients scored (16.6 ± 2.4) and (11.0 ± 2.2) points in avoidance and resignation coping behaviors, which were significantly higher than the domestic norm score (14.4 ± 3.0), (8.8 ± 3.2) points (with t values respectively 7.06 and 7.76, P values both below 0.01). The patients' standard score of SAS, SDS, PCL-C were (50 ± 11), (54 ± 11), and (38 ± 12) points. Respectively 89.1% (57/64), 60.9% (39/64), 46.9% (30/64) of the patients showed anxiety, depression, and PTSD symptoms. (2) Four independent variables: age, gender, marital status, and time after burns, were correlated with the psychological disorders, but the correlativity was not statistically significant (with rs values from -0.089 to 0.245, P values all above 0.05). Educational status was significantly negatively correlated with anxiety, depression, PTSD and its core symptoms of flashback, avoidance (with rs values from -0.361 to -0.253, P values all below 0.05). Educational status was negatively correlated with hypervigilance, but the correlativity was not statistically significant (rs = -0.187, P > 0.05). Burn area was significantly positively correlated with the psychological disorders (with rs values from 0.306 to 0.478, P values all below 0.05). Confrontation coping behavior was positively correlated with the psychological disorders, but the correlativity was not statistically significant (with rs values from 0.121 to 0.550, P values all above 0.05). Avoidance coping behavior was correlated with the psychological disorders, but the correlativity was not statistically significant (with rs values from -0.144 to 0.193, P values all above 0.05). Resignation coping behavior was significantly positively correlated with the psychological disorder (with rs values from 0.377 to 0.596, P values all below 0.01). (3) Educational status had predictive power on the anxiety, PTSD and flash back symptoms of patients (with t values from -2.19 to -2.02, P values all below 0.05), but not on depression, avoidance and hypervigilance (with t values from -1.95 to -0.99, P values all above 0.05). Burn area had no predictive power on the psychological disorders (with t values from 0.55 to 1.78, P values all above 0.05). Resignation coping behavior had predictive power on the psychological disorders (with t values from 3.10 to 6.46, P values below 0.01). Confrontation and avoidance coping behaviors had no predictive power on the psychological disorders (with t values from 0.46 to 2.32 and -0.89 and 1.75 respectively, P values all above 0.05).
The severely burned patients with lower educational status, larger burn area, and the more frequently adapted resignation coping behavior are more likely to suffer from anxiety, depression, and PTSD.
Evidence has shown that people living with nonpsychotic mental disorders experience difficulties in maintaining their daily living, consequently impacting on psychological well-being. However, the role of daily life experience remains unclear. This systematic review and meta-analysis aims to determine the association between daily life experience and psychological well-being in people living with nonpsychotic mental disorders, and evaluate daily life experience as a moderator of psychological well-being in this population.
Literature search will be performed using a combination of title/abstract words and subject headings on 7 electronic databases according to predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria. Data will be extracted by 4 independent reviewers (JH, SPCN, WKKW, and WKH). Disagreement will be resolved by discussion with senior reviewers. Observational studies involving subjects with unipolar depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety disorder, acute stress disorder, as post-traumatic stress disorder as distinct groups with quantitative measurement of daily life experience and psychological well-being will be included.
Effect sizes will be pooled by random effects model. The quality of the studies will be assessed using Newcastle-Ottawa scale. Heterogeneity between studies will be quantified using I index. This review is registered in PROSPERO.
While symptoms and existing treatments of nonpsychotic mental disorders could be long term and dependent upon medical regimens, sustaining daily life experience will be a potentially important and concrete pathway that empowers patients to recover from the disorders, maintain or enhance psychological well-being, and be reintegrated into society. Findings of this review will inform prospective interventional trials of enhancing daily life experience in prevention of recurrence and enhancing psychological well-being in people living with nonpsychotic mental disorders.
Potential associations between dietary glycemic index (GI) and glycemic load (GL) with psychological disorders remain uncertain.
We investigated the relations of dietary GI and GL with psychological distress, anxiety, and depression.
A total of 3363 nonacademic members of the staff of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences were included in this cross-sectional study. GI and GL were assessed by using a validated, self-administered, dish-based, semiquantitative food-frequency questionnaire. Validated Iranian versions of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale and General Health Questionnaire-12 were used to assess anxiety, depression, and psychological distress.
After control for potential confounders, individuals in the top tertile of GI had greater odds of depression (OR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.03, 2.02; P-trend = 0.03) and a trend for greater odds of anxiety (OR: 1.52; 95% CI: 0.97, 2.38; P trend = 0.06) compared with those in the first tertile. Higher GL values were linked to lower odds for mental disorders (OR: 0.66; 95% CI: 0.49, 0.90; P-trend = 0.009), depression (OR: 0.69; 95% CI: 0.51, 0.93; P-trend = 0.02), and psychological distress (OR: 0.67; 95% CI: 0.48, 0.92; P-trend = 0.01). Significant interactions were observed between GI and sex for depression (P = 0.01) and psychological distress (P = 0.046) in the crude model. In stratified analyses by sex, after control for potential confounders, a greater GI was linked to a higher odds of depression (OR: 1.52; 95% CI: 1.20, 1.94; P-trend = 0.001) and psychological distress (OR: 1.66; 95% CI: 1.28, 2.14; P-trend = 0.001) in women but not in men.
Our findings support a direct link between the odds of depression and dietary GI but inverse associations between GL and mental disorders, depression, and psychological distress. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT02362113.
Augmented Reality is a new technological system that allows introducing virtual contents in the real world in order to run in the same representation and, in real time, enhancing the user's sensory perception of reality. From another point of view, Augmented Reality can be defined as a set of techniques and tools that add information to the physical reality. To date, Augmented Reality has been used in many fields, such as medicine, entertainment, maintenance, architecture, education, and cognitive and motor rehabilitation but very few studies and applications of AR exist in clinical psychology. In the treatment of psychological disorders, Augmented Reality has given preliminary evidence to be a useful tool due to its adaptability to the patient needs and therapeutic purposes and interactivity. Another relevant factor is the quality of the user's experience in the Augmented Reality system determined from emotional engagement and sense of presence. This experience could increase the AR ecological validity in the treatment of psychological disorders. This paper reviews the recent studies on the use of Augmented Reality in the evaluation and treatment of psychological disorders, focusing on current uses of this technology and on the specific features that delineate Augmented Reality a new technique useful for psychology. 
People living in humanitarian settings in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) are exposed to a constellation of stressors that make them vulnerable to developing mental disorders. Mental disorders with a higher prevalence in these settings include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major depressive, anxiety, somatoform (e.g. medically unexplained physical symptoms (MUPS)), and related disorders. A range of psychological therapies are used to manage symptoms of mental disorders in this population.
To compare the effectiveness and acceptability of psychological therapies versus control conditions (wait list, treatment as usual, attention placebo, psychological placebo, or no treatment) aimed at treating people with mental disorders (PTSD and major depressive, anxiety, somatoform, and related disorders) living in LMICs affected by humanitarian crises.
We searched the Cochrane Common Mental Disorders Controlled Trials Register (CCMDCTR), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (Wiley), MEDLINE (OVID), Embase (OVID), and PsycINFO (OVID), with results incorporated from searches to 3 February 2016. We also searched the World Health Organization (WHO) trials portal (ICTRP) and ClinicalTrials.gov to identify any unpublished or ongoing studies. We checked the reference lists of relevant studies and reviews.
All randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing psychological therapies versus control conditions (including no treatment, usual care, wait list, attention placebo, and psychological placebo) to treat adults and children with mental disorders living in LMICs affected by humanitarian crises.
We used standard Cochrane procedures for collecting data and evaluating risk of bias. We calculated standardised mean differences for continuous outcomes and risk ratios for dichotomous data, using a random-effects model. We analysed data at endpoint (zero to four weeks after therapy); at medium term (one to four months after therapy); and at long term (six months or longer). GRADE (Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) was used to assess the quality of evidence for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, anxiety and withdrawal outcomes.
We included 36 studies (33 RCTs) with a total of 3523 participants. Included studies were conducted in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and North Africa, and Asia. Studies were implemented in response to armed conflicts; disasters triggered by natural hazards; and other types of humanitarian crises. Together, the 33 RCTs compared eight psychological treatments against a control comparator.Four studies included children and adolescents between 5 and 18 years of age. Three studies included mixed populations (two studies included participants between 12 and 25 years of age, and one study included participants between 16 and 65 years of age). Remaining studies included adult populations (18 years of age or older).Included trials compared a psychological therapy versus a control intervention (wait list in most studies; no treatment; treatment as usual). Psychological therapies were categorised mainly as cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) in 23 comparisons (including seven comparisons focused on narrative exposure therapy (NET), two focused on common elements treatment approach (CETA), and one focused on brief behavioural activation treatment (BA)); eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR) in two comparisons; interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) in three comparisons; thought field therapy (TFT) in three comparisons; and trauma or general supportive counselling in two comparisons. Although interventions were described under these categories, several psychotherapeutic elements were common to a range of therapies (i.e. psychoeducation, coping skills).In adults, psychological therapies may substantially reduce endpoint PTSD symptoms compared to control conditions (standardised mean difference (SMD) -1.07, 95% confidence interval (CI) -1.34 to -0.79; 1272 participants; 16 studies; low-quality evidence). The effect is smaller at one to four months (SMD -0.49, 95% CI -0.68 to -0.31; 1660 participants; 18 studies) and at six months (SMD -0.37, 95% CI -0.61 to -0.14; 400 participants; five studies). Psychological therapies may also substantially reduce endpoint depression symptoms compared to control conditions (SMD -0.86, 95% CI -1.06 to -0.67; 1254 participants; 14 studies; low-quality evidence). Similar to PTSD symptoms, follow-up data at one to four months showed a smaller effect on depression (SMD -0.42, 95% CI -0.63 to -0.21; 1386 participants; 16 studies). Psychological therapies may moderately reduce anxiety at endpoint (SMD -0.74, 95% CI -0.98 to -0.49; 694 participants; five studies; low-quality evidence) and at one to four months' follow-up after treatment (SMD -0.53, 95% CI -0.66 to -0.39; 969 participants; seven studies). Dropout rates are probably similar between study conditions (19.5% with control versus 19.1% with psychological therapy (RR 0.98 95% CI 0.82 to 1.16; 2930 participants; 23 studies, moderate quality evidence)).In children and adolescents, we found very low quality evidence for lower endpoint PTSD symptoms scores in psychotherapy conditions (CBT) compared to control conditions, although the confidence interval is wide (SMD -1.56, 95% CI -3.13 to 0.01; 130 participants; three studies;). No RCTs provided data on major depression or anxiety in children. The effect on withdrawal was uncertain (RR 1.87 95% CI 0.47 to 7.47; 138 participants; 3 studies, low quality evidence).We did not identify any studies that evaluated psychological treatments on (symptoms of) somatoform disorders or MUPS in LMIC humanitarian settings.
There is low quality evidence that psychological therapies have large or moderate effects in reducing PTSD, depressive, and anxiety symptoms in adults living in humanitarian settings in LMICs. By one to four month and six month follow-up assessments treatment effects were smaller. Fewer trials were focused on children and adolescents and they provide very low quality evidence of a beneficial effect of psychological therapies in reducing PTSD symptoms at endpoint. Confidence in these findings is influenced by the risk of bias in the studies and by substantial levels of heterogeneity. More research evidence is needed, particularly for children and adolescents over longer periods of follow-up.
Psychological disorders, most notably anxiety and depressive disorders, somatization and catastrophizing, often precede or exacerbate functional gastrointestinal disorder (FGID) symptoms and correlate with symptom severity and health outcomes. Mounting evidence shows that psychological distress alters gut immunity, in particular mast cell activation, leading to a potentiation of sensory nerves and aberrant visceral pain perception. On the other hand, psychological stressors modulate the processing of incoming sensory signals by the brain, thereby contributing to FGID symptom development. A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying stress-induced changes in the immune system or brain processing is crucial for the development of novel beneficial therapeutic strategies. 
We systematically review factors associated with the presence of psychological distress or common mental disorders in migrant populations. Articles published between January 2000 and December 2014 were reviewed and 85 applying multivariate statistical analysis were selected. Common mental disorders were significantly associated with socio-demographic and psychological characteristics, as observed in large epidemiological studies on general populations. The probability of common mental disorders occurrence differs significantly among migrant groups according to their region of origin. Moreover, traumatic events prior to migration, forced, unplanned, poorly planned or illegal migration, low level of acculturation, living alone or separated from family in the host country, lack of social support, perceived discrimination, and the length of migrants' residence in the host country all increase the likelihood of CMD. In contrast, language proficiency, family reunification, and perceived social support reduce such probability. Factors related with the risk of psychiatric morbidity among migrants should be taken into account to design preventive strategies.
Because findings on the mental health status of Holocaust survivors' offspring have been inconsistent, we aimed to identify factors that place some offspring at greater risk for developing mood or anxiety disorders.
Using a web-based survey and structured clinical interviews with adult children of survivors, we attempted to predict disorders from offspring's circumstances, perceptions of parents' posttrauma adaptational styles, and self-reported reparative adaptational impacts. Posttrauma adaptational styles encompass intrafamilial and interpersonal psychological, social and behavioral coping, mastery, and defense mechanisms used by each parent. Reparative adaptational impacts reflect the offspring's self-reported insecurity about their own competence, reparative protectiveness, need for control, obsession with the Holocaust, defensive psychosocial constriction, and immature dependency.
Of the disorders studied, generalized anxiety disorder was most frequent, followed by major depressive episode and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Only 2 variables independently predicted these disorders: participants' age and reparative adaptational impacts. Parents' styles were correlated with the presence of disorder, but had no effect when the child's reparative impacts were controlled. The age effect was consistent with epidemiologic research showing lower prevalence of psychological disorder in older cohorts. The severity of participants' reparative impacts was unequivocally the most important (OR = 5.3) or at least the most proximal precursor to the development of psychological disorders. When reparative impacts were low, frequency of disorder was low (8%); when reparative impacts were high, frequency of disorder was high (46%).
Reparative adaptational impacts could guide clinicians in treating children of survivors. (PsycINFO Database Record
Depression and anxiety are common mental disorders globally but are rarely recognized or treated in low-income settings. Task-shifting of mental health care to lay health workers (LHWs) might decrease the treatment gap.
To evaluate the effectiveness of a culturally adapted psychological intervention for common mental disorders delivered by LHWs in primary care.
Cluster randomized clinical trial with 6 months' follow-up conducted from September 1, 2014, to May 25, 2015, in Harare, Zimbabwe. Twenty-four clinics were randomized 1:1 to the intervention or enhanced usual care (control). Participants were clinic attenders 18 years or older who screened positive for common mental disorders on the locally validated Shona Symptom Questionnaire (SSQ-14).
The Friendship Bench intervention comprised 6 sessions of individual problem-solving therapy delivered by trained, supervised LHWs plus an optional 6-session peer support program. The control group received standard care plus information, education, and support on common mental disorders.
Primary outcome was common mental disorder measured at 6 months as a continuous variable via the SSQ-14 score, with a range of 0 (best) to 14 and a cutpoint of 9. The secondary outcome was depression symptoms measured as a binary variable via the 9-item Patient Health Questionnaire, with a range of 0 (best) to 27 and a cutpoint of 11. Outcomes were analyzed by modified intention-to-treat.
Among 573 randomized patients (286 in the intervention group and 287 in the control group), 495 (86.4%) were women, median age was 33 years (interquartile range, 27-41 years), 238 (41.7%) were human immunodeficiency virus positive, and 521 (90.9%) completed follow-up at 6 months. Intervention group participants had fewer symptoms than control group participants on the SSQ-14 (3.81; 95% CI, 3.28 to 4.34 vs 8.90; 95% CI, 8.33 to 9.47; adjusted mean difference, -4.86; 95% CI, -5.63 to -4.10; P < .001; adjusted risk ratio [ARR], 0.21; 95% CI, 0.15 to 0.29; P < .001). Intervention group participants also had lower risk of symptoms of depression (13.7% vs 49.9%; ARR, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.22 to 0.34; P < .001).
Among individuals screening positive for common mental disorders in Zimbabwe, LHW-administered, primary care-based problem-solving therapy with education and support compared with standard care plus education and support resulted in improved symptoms at 6 months. Scaled-up primary care integration of this intervention should be evaluated.
pactr.org Identifier: PACTR201410000876178.
Chronic rhinosinusitis refers to inflammation of the nasal and sinuses mucosa and the main criteria for diagnosis of this disease related to the nasal cavity or the facial area. According to several reports based on the relationship of this disease with mental disorders, psychological issues are missing in the criteria of chronic rhinosinusitis diagnosis. In this study the etiology and clinical symptoms of the disease were studied by searching scientific databases and authentic Iranian Medicine books such as Avicenna's book The Canon of Medicine (Al-Qanun fi't-Tibb) that now taught in medicine schools of the Traditional East Asian; the results of this study showed that rhinosinusitis accompaniment with psychological symptoms are listed in abundance not only in old books but also in scientific literature before 1928 but after the discovery of antibiotics and extreme attention in the context of physiopathological assignment of diseases to pathogens, this relationship has been weakened. Given the positive results of recent studies on rhinosinusitis accompaniment with psychological disorders it is suggested that more studies are needed to explore the relationship between chronic rhinosinusitis and psychological diseases and, if necessary, to be included in the diagnostic criteria as a diagnostic standard.
Although much has been published on the effects of the 1990/1991 Gulf War on the psychological health of veterans, few studies have addressed the pattern and timing of post-war development of psychological disorders. Our study aims to identify the most common psychological disorders that first appeared post-Gulf War, the period of peak prevalence and the sequence of multiple psychological disorders.
The temporal progression of psychological disorders in male Australian naval Gulf War veterans with no prior psychological disorders was calculated across each year of the post-Gulf War period. DSM-IV diagnoses were obtained using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview.
Psychological disorder rates peaked in the first 2 years (1991-1992) following the Gulf War. Alcohol use disorders were the most likely to appear first. Classification and regression tree analysis found that risk of disorder was exacerbated if veterans had been exposed to a high number of potential psychological stressors during their military service. Lower military rank was associated with increased risk of alcohol disorders, particularly during the first 2 years post-Gulf War. In veterans with two or more disorders, anxiety disorders and alcohol disorders tended to appear before affective disorders.
Our study found that psychological disorders occur in sequence following Gulf War deployment. Our findings may help clinicians to anticipate, and better manage, multiple symptomatology. The findings may also assist veteran and defence organisations in planning effective mental health screening, management and prevention policy.
The impact of humanitarian disasters upon mental health is well recognised. The evidence for psychological interventions for mental health is mounting, but few interventions have been rigorously tested in humanitarian settings. To be sustainable in humanitarian settings interventions need to be short, simple, deliverable by nonspecialists under supervision, and adopt a transdiagnostic approach where an array of mental health outcomes are addressed simultaneously. These elements have been incorporated into the newly developed WHO Problem Management Plus (PM+) Group intervention. The aim of this trial is to evaluate the locally adapted PM+ Group intervention for women in Swat, Pakistan.
This PM+ Group trial is a two-arm, single-blind, cluster randomised controlled trial conducted in a community-based setting with women in rural Pakistan. PM+ is delivered in partnership with the Lady Health Worker (LHW) Programme which provides community-based health care to women in Pakistan. Thirty-four LHW clusters will be randomised in a 1:1 allocation ratio using a permuted-block randomisation method. Participants screened and found to meet the inclusion criteria will be allocated to either the PM+ intervention group (n = 306), or the control arm (n = 306). The manualised PM+ intervention involves five sessions, each lasting 3 h, and introduces four strategies applied by participants to problems that they are facing. It is delivered by local female facilitators with a minimum of 16 years of education who are provided with targeted training and supervision. The primary outcome is individual psychological distress, measured by levels of anxiety and depression on the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale at 20 weeks after baseline. Secondary outcomes include major depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, levels of social support, levels of functioning, and economic effectiveness. Intervention acceptability will be explored through an embedded qualitative study.
The PM+ Group trial will provide important evidence on the effectiveness of an empirically supported psychological treatment delivered by nonspecialists in a humanitarian setting. If proven effective, the qualitative component will inform strategies for PM+ Group scale-up in health systems in other humanitarian settings.
Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry, identifier: ACTRN12616000037404. Registered on 19 January 2016; WHO Protocol ID RPC705, v.4, 2 November 2015.
Known association between tinnitus and psychological distress prompted us to examine patients with chronic tinnitus by using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI), which is a standardized and reliable method used for the diagnosis of mental disorders.
One hundred patients with chronic tinnitus admitted to the Tinnitus Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, were included in this study. Data were collected between February 2008 and February 2009. Besides CIDI, the Tinnitus Questionnaire according to Goebel and Hiller, the Hospital Anxiety Depression Scale, and the General Anxiety Disorder-7 were used.
Using CIDI, we have identified one or more mental disorders in 46 tinnitus patients. In that group, we found persistent affective disorders (37 %), anxiety disorders (32 %), and somatoform disorders (27 %). Those patients who had affective or anxiety disorders were more distressed by tinnitus and were more anxious and more depressed than tinnitus patients without mental disorders. Psychological impairment positively correlated with tinnitus distress: Patients with decompensated tinnitus had significantly more affective and anxiety disorders than patients with compensated tinnitus.
In the present study, we have detected a high rate (almost half of the cases) of psychological disorders occurring in patients with chronic tinnitus. The patients diagnosed with psychological disorders were predominantly affected by affective and anxiety disorders. Psychological disorders were associated with severity of tinnitus distress. Our findings imply a need for routine comprehensive screening of mental disorders in patients with chronic tinnitus.
This exploratory study is an extension of previous studies which have applied personal construct theory (PCP) methodology toward a better understanding of the structure and dynamics of multidisciplinary mental (and physical) health care (Kirkcaldy and Pope, 1992; Kirkcaldy et al., 1993, 2000, 2005; Kirkcaldy and Siefen, 1999). In this study we wanted to use similar cluster statistical analyses, not unlike PCP analysis, to identify the diverse subjective models of psychological ailments such as anxiety, depression, psychosis, mania, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), post stress traumatic disorder (PTSD), etc., using not the idiosyncratic constructs generated by individual triadic element comparisons, but by selecting those constructs which have been clearly identified in various psychiatric and psychological rating scales (e.g. somatic preoccupation, social withdrawal, conceptual disorganization, hostility, disinhibition and controlling). Clinical experts (psychological psychotherapists, and medical psychotherapist and psychiatrist) each with over 25 years of clinical and research experience were required to complete the ratings of each disorder listed in terms of the pre-formulated behavioral, emotional and cognitive concepts. What emerged are several multivariate (grid) analyses based on mental health professionals' perception of diverse elements (disorders) and their interrelationship derived from the similarity of composite profiles of ill-related constructs. Overall, the analyses revealed clear associations between the subjective evaluations of psychological ailments suggesting some uniformity in mental health assessment of such disorders. The implications of these findings are discussed within the theoretical framework of improved mental health care.
Especially when chronic, the presence of a somatic disorder is accompanied by various levels of psychological stress, which can range up to comorbidity with mental disorders. In addition, chronic somatic diseases and mental disorders are often interdependent. Treatment for persons with mental and somatic comorbidity is frequently offered in the context of medical rehabilitation. As skills of psychotherapists are concerned, comorbidity needs a bio-psychosocial approach in which knowledge of medicine, psychology, and social sciences is integrated. In addition to the expert skills of psychotherapists, interprofessional training, basic knowledge, and communication with physicians are necessary. The present article outlines conditions for outpatient psychotherapeutic care of persons with chronic somatic diseases and addresses central problems in the differential diagnosis of mental and somatic disorders as well as treatment indications when comorbidity is present. Selected examples for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with cardiovascular disorder and diabetes, respectively, illustrate these aspects.
An understanding of etiological and maintaining factors of mental disorders is essential for the treatment of mental disorders, as well as mental health promotion and protection. The present study examines predictors of the incidence, remission and relapse of a wide range of Axis I mental disorders, using data from the Dresden Predictor Study. A sample of 1394 young German women completed questionnaires evaluating psychological factors (positive mental health, self-efficacy, life satisfaction, neuroticism, psychopathology and dysfunctional attitudes) and global assessment of functioning, as well as structured diagnostic interviews assessing incidence and change (remission, relapse) in mental disorders. Predictors were analysed using a multivariate logistic regression model. Significant factors for incidence of mental disorders included neuroticism and global functioning. A remitting course of mental disorders was predicted by positive mental health, self-efficacy and global assessment of functioning. Relapse was significantly predicted by neuroticism and dysfunctional attitudes. Results imply that mental health promotion is particularly important for women with high neuroticism and low functioning, as they tend to be at risk for incidence. Mental disorder treatment may benefit from strengthening positive mental health and functioning, as these factors promote remission. Relapse-prevention may benefit from attention to neuroticism and dysfunctional attitudes in order to reduce the likelihood of relapse. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Incidence of mental disorders in young women was predicted by neuroticism and low global functioning. There seems to be a need for preventive interventions addressing high neuroticism and low global functioning. Remission in young women was predicted by positive mental health. It may be helpful to include resource-based interventions, which can strengthen or support general positive mental health. Relapse in young women was predicted by two negative psychological factors: high neuroticism and reporting many dysfunctional attitudes. Psychotherapy addressing the characteristics and behaviour of neurotic patients might be beneficial. Interventions should also focus on addressing and changing dysfunctional attitudes.
Chronic low level exposure to organophosphate (OPs) pesticides in adulthood has been linked to adverse neurobehavioural deficits and psychological disorder symptoms, although this remains a contentious issue. The OP-induced biological changes that could underlie these effects are unclear. We assessed gene expression changes following chronic low level exposure to diazinon, a pesticide with a high dietary exposure risk. Adult male rats were orally exposed to diazinon (0, 1, 2mg/kg, 5days a week for 12 weeks). After 4 weeks, marble burying behaviour was lower in diazinon exposed rats than vehicle exposed rats; this difference persisted for 8 weeks. Chronic diazinon exposure did not significantly inhibit acetylcholinesterase activity, the primary mechanism of action of high level OPs. Affymetrix GeneChip<sup>®</sup> HT RG-230 PM Arrays were used for gene profiling followed by Ingenuity Pathway analysis. In the hippocampus, the most significant gene expression changes caused by OP exposure were associated with Psychological Disorders, and Cell-To-Cell Signalling and Interaction functions. Genes encoding the AMPA<sub>3</sub> glutamate receptor, glutaminase, dopamine transporter and tyrosine hydroxylase were up-regulated, whereas the gene encoding the GABA<sub>B1</sub> receptor was down-regulated. In the dorsal raphe nucleus, genes associated with development and the Psychological Disorders function were significantly affected, including the up-regulation of the gene encoding the α<sub>1b</sub>-adrenoceptor, the major driver of serotoninergic (5-HT) neuronal activity. These data indicate that chronic exposure to diazinon in adulthood, below the threshold to inhibit acetylcholinesterase, stimulates glutamatergic, dopaminergic and serotonergic synaptic transmission which may underlie adverse neurological outcomes.
Headache and psychopathology (especially anxiety and mood disorders) are comorbid across the life span. The present study is a clinical contribution in the direction of studying the familial recurrence of headache, and the interplay of headache and psychopathology in children.
The clinical sample is composed by 130 headache patients (53 boys and 77 girls, age range 8-18), while the control group is composed by 87 healthy subjects from the general population (39 boys and 48 girls, age range 8-18). A structured interview according to International Classification for Headache Disorders-II criteria has been administered to the clinical group; the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) and the Self Administrated Psychiatric Scales for Children and Adolescents (SAFA) have been used in order to assess psychopathology in both groups.
The recurrence of headache in family members is confirmed by the present study, albeit limited to paternal side, χ2 (4, N.=130)=10.47, P=0.033. Results also showed that scores obtained by the clinical sample in CBCL and SAFA are generally higher than scores obtained by the control group, but without differences between headache sub-types. Finally, internalizing symptoms (anxiety and depression) in children correlate with mothers' point of view, r≥0.23, P<0.05, outlining a specific attunement between headache patients and their mothers.
Headache runs in families, with high level of psychological disorders. Mothers are particularly attuned with the psychological needs of their headache children.
Research on the quality of life (QL) of children/adolescents with psychological disorders has flourished over the last few decades. Given the developmental challenges of QL measurements in pediatric populations, the aim of this study was to ascertain the extent to which a developmental approach to QL assessment has been applied to pedopsychiatric QL research. A systematic literature search was conducted in three electronic databases (PubMed, PsycINFO, SocINDEX) from 1994 to May 2014. Quantitative studies were included if they assessed the self- or proxy-reported QL of children/adolescents with a psychological disorder. Data were extracted for study design, participants, QL instruments and informants, and statistical approach to age-related specificities. The systematic review revealed widespread utilization of developmentally appropriate QL instruments but less frequent use of both self and proxy reports and an inconsistent approach to age group specificities. Methodological guidelines are discussed to improve the developmental validity of QL research for children/adolescents with mental disorders. 
Work capacity demands are a concept to describe which psychological capacities are required in a job. Assessing psychological work capacity demands is of specific importance when mental health problems at work endanger work ability. Exploring psychological work capacity demands is the basis for mental hazard analysis or rehabilitative action, e.g. in terms of work adjustmentOBJECTIVE:This is the first study investigating psychological work capacity demands in rehabilitation patients with and without mental disorders.
A structured interview on psychological work capacity demands (Mini-ICF-Work; Muschalla, 2015; Linden et al., 2015) was done with 166 rehabilitation patients of working age. All interviews were done by a state-licensed socio-medically trained psychotherapist. Inter-rater-reliability was assessed by determining agreement in independent co-rating in 65 interviews. For discriminant validity purposes, participants filled in the Short Questionnaire for Work Analysis (KFZA, Prümper et al., 1994).
In different professional fields, different psychological work capacity demands were of importance. The Mini-ICF-Work capacity dimensions reflect different aspects than the KFZA. Patients with mental disorders were longer on sick leave and had worse work ability prognosis than patients without mental disorders, although both groups reported similar work capacity demands.
Psychological work demands - which are highly relevant for work ability prognosis and work adjustment processes - can be explored and differentiated in terms of psychological capacity demands.
Scientific knowledge about symptoms of common mental disorders in elite sports is scarce. Consequently, the objectives of the study were to (i) establish the 12-month incidence of symptoms of common mental disorders (CMD; distress, anxiety/depression, sleep disturbance, adverse alcohol use, eating disorders) among Dutch elite athletes and (ii) explore their potential association with several stressors (being injured, recent life events, career dissatisfaction).
A prospective cohort study with a 12-month follow-up period was conducted. The study used validated questionnaires to assess symptoms of common mental disorders (thus not clinically diagnosed) as well as several stressors; an electronic questionnaire was set up and repeatedly distributed.
A total of 203 elite athletes gave their written informed consent to participate in the study, from which 143 completed the 12-month follow-up period (follow-up rate of 70%). Incidence of symptoms of CMD ranged from 6% for adverse alcohol use to 57% for symptoms of anxiety/depression. Over the follow-up period, around 17% of the participants reported two simultaneous symptoms of CMD, and around 19% reported three simultaneous symptoms of CMD. Inferences between some stressors and symptoms of CMD were found but none of the associations were statistically significant.
Substantial 12-month incidence rates of symptoms of CMD (self-reported and not clinically diagnosed) were found among Dutch elite athletes (especially for anxiety/depression), appearing similar to the ones found among athletes from other sports disciplines and the Dutch general population. Also, inferences between some stressors and symptoms of CMD were found but none of the associations were statistically significant. Supportive and preventive measures directed towards symptoms of CMD should be developed to improve awareness and psychological resilience of athletes, which would likely improve their performance and quality-of-life.
We examined the association between long work hours, assembly line work and stress-related diseases utilizing objective health and employment data from an employer's administrative databases.
A North American automobile manufacturing company provided data for claims for sickness, accident and disability insurance (work absence of at least 4 days) for cardiovascular disease (CVD), hypertension and psychological disorders, employee demographics, and facility hours worked per year for 1996-2001. Age-adjusted claim rates and age-adjusted rate ratios were calculated using Poisson regression, except for comparisons between production and skilled trades workers owing to lack of age denominator data by job category. Associations between overtime hours and claim rates by facility were examined by Poisson regression and multi-level Poisson regression.
Claims for hypertension, coronary heart disease, CVD, and psychological disorders were associated with facility overtime hours. We estimate that a facility with 10 more overtime hours per week than another facility would have 4.36 more claims for psychological disorders, 2.33 more claims for CVD, and 3.29 more claims for hypertension per 1,000 employees per year. Assembly plants had the highest rates of claims for most conditions. Production workers tended to have higher rates of claims than skilled trades workers.
Data from an auto manufacturer's administrative databases suggest that autoworkers working long hours, and assembly-line workers relative to skilled trades workers or workers in non-assembly facilities, have a higher risk of hypertension, CVD, and psychological disorders. Occupational disease surveillance and disease prevention programs need to fully utilize such administrative data.
Introduction People with mental disorders face stigma and discriminatory hiring practices in the competitive labour market. This study on employers' representations of mental disorders provides knowledge regarding the specifics of their negative perceptions for this population, which appears to be an important barrier to their inclusion in the workplace. Heilman's lack of fit model (1983) enabled to show that recruiters seek to match the characteristics they perceive in candidates with those they deem necessary to succeed in the organization. A lack of fit between the two components-candidates and the selection criteria-would explain the non-selection of the applicant. This psychological process can be applied to the recruitment of people with psychiatric disabilities.Objectives The goal of this study was to identify employers' representations towards mental disorder in general and in the workplace particularly, as well as to determine the prerequisites for hiring this population. As such, this would allow to better understand the psychological processes involved in the exclusion of people with psychiatric disabilities.Method In a qualitative study, 29 semi-structured interviews were conducted with employers and HR Department representatives of organizations in France that were under the French legal obligation to hire people with a disability (organizations having more than 20 employees). We used the free association technique to identify representational contents concerning mental disorder. Qualitative data on the essential prerequisites for recruitment were collected through open-ended questions. The data were processed by a categorical content analysis conducted independently by three researchers. The structure of the representation was identified by distinguishing the components of the central nucleus from those of the peripheral nucleus according to the two criteria of the method of Moliner (1994): the index of popularity of each element and the co-occurrence between each element of the representation.Results Results revealed negative representations of people with mental disorders, focusing on social deviance and harm to society, believing that people with mental disorders would have non-standard skills and behaviours and would be socially disruptive and burdensome, particularly in the workplace. The analysis of the prerequisites for hiring persons with psychiatric disabilities showed how these representations towards mental disorders are barriers for their recruitment, mainly linked to a perceived lack of employment fit.Conclusion Future avenues of research and actions are suggested. They are as follows: learning, education on mental disorders, training and specific techniques to reduce organizational stakeholders' stereotypes and prejudice. Also, supporting stakeholders for the inclusion of people with mental disorders in the workplace appears fundamental, especially by improving recruitment and integration practises.
The diagnosis of cancer is strongly associated with the risk of mental disorders even in patients with no previous history of mental disorders. Accumulating data suggest that mental distress may accelerate tumor progression. We hypothesized therefore that mental disorders after a cancer diagnosis may increase the risk of cancer-specific mortality.
We conducted a nationwide cohort study including 244 261 cancer patients diagnosed in Sweden during 2004-2009 and followed them through 2010. Through the Swedish Patient Register, we obtained clinical diagnoses of all mental disorders and focused on mood-, anxiety-, and substance abuse disorders (ICD10: F10-F16, F18-F19, F32-F33, F40-F41, and F43-45) that are commonly diagnosed among patients with cancer. We further classified the studied mental disorders into first-onset or recurrent mental disorders. We used Cox regression to estimate multivariable hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) as a measure of the association between mental disorders after cancer diagnosis and cancer-specific mortality, adjusting for age, sex, calendar period, educational level, cancer stage, and cancer type at diagnosis.
After cancer diagnosis, 11 457 patients were diagnosed with mood-, anxiety-, and substance abuse disorders; of which 7236 were first-onset mental disorders. Patients with a first-onset mental disorder were at increased risk of cancer-specific mortality (HR: 1.82, 95% CI: 1.71-1.92) while patients with a recurrent mental disorder had much lower risk elevation (HR: 1.14, 95% CI: 1.05-1.24). The increased cancer-specific mortality by first-onset mental disorders was observed for almost all cancer sites/groups and the association was stronger for localized cancers (HR: 2.00, 95% CI: 1.73-2.31) than for advanced cancers (HR: 1.49, 95% CI: 1.32-1.69).
Patients with a first-onset common mood-, anxiety-, or substance abuse disorder after cancer diagnosis may be at increased risk of cancer-specific death.
Recent research suggests that the prevalence of early heart failure may be on the rise. Compromised mental health in adolescence may help to explain this phenomenon. We aimed to investigate whether nonpsychotic mental disorder and low stress resilience in late adolescence were associated with increased risk of early heart failure.
A prospective cohort study of 18-year-old men (n=1,784,450) who enlisted 1968-2005. At the conscription examination, 74,522 individuals were diagnosed with nonpsychotic mental disorders. Stress resilience was rated by psychologists; values were trichotomized. The risk of heart failure during the 46-year follow-up was calculated with Cox proportional hazards models. Baseline comorbidities, BMI, blood pressure, fitness, IQ, and parental education were included in the models.
Incident cases of heart failure (n=9962) were identified in the National Hospital Register. In fully adjusted models, increased risk of early heart failure was observed in males diagnosed with nonpsychotic mental disorders at conscription (hazard ratio (HR), 1.36; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.25-1.47). The highest risk was seen among men with the risk factor alcohol/substance use (HR 1.90; 95% CI 1.59-2.28). Conscripts with the risk factor low stress resilience showed increased risk of heart failure compared to those with high scores (HR 1.41; 95% CI 1.30-1.53).
Nonpsychotic mental disorder, as well as low stress resilience in late adolescence may be associated with increased risk of early heart failure. Adolescence is potentially an important time for mental health interventions that may reduce both short and long-term consequences.
To explore the associations of severe musculoskeletal injuries (joint and muscles) and surgeries with symptoms of common mental disorders (distress, anxiety/depression, sleeping disturbance, adverse alcohol behaviour , smoking, adverse nutrition behaviour) among male European professional footballers.
Cross-sectional analyses were conducted on electronic questionnaires completed by professional footballers recruited from the national players' unions of Finland, France, Norway, Spain or Sweden. The number of severe (time loss of more than 28 days) musculoskeletal injuries (total, joint, muscle) and surgeries during a professional football career was examined through four questions, while symptoms of common mental disorders were evaluated through validated scales.
A total of 540 professional footballers (mean age of 27 years; 54 % playing in the highest leagues) participated in the study. Sixty-eight per cent of the participants had already incurred one or more severe joint injuries and 60 % one or more severe muscle injuries. Prevalence of symptoms of common mental disorders ranged from 3 % for smoking to 37 % for anxiety/depression and 58 % for adverse nutrition behaviour. The number of severe musculoskeletal injuries during a football career was positively correlated with distress, anxiety and sleeping disturbance, while the number of surgeries was correlated with adverse alcohol behaviour and smoking. Professional footballers who had sustained one or more severe musculoskeletal injuries during their career were two to nearly four times more likely to report symptoms of common mental disorders than professional footballers who had not suffered from severe musculoskeletal injuries.
It can be concluded that the number of severe musculoskeletal injuries and surgeries during a career is positively correlated and associated with symptoms of common mental disorders among male European professional footballers. This study emphasises the importance of applying a multidisciplinary approach to the clinical care and support of professional footballers, especially when a player faces lengthy periods without training and competition as a consequence of recurrent severe joint or muscle injuries.
III.
Psychiatric comorbidities are common among patients with cancer. However, whether or not there is increased risk of mental disorders during the diagnostic workup leading to a cancer diagnosis was unknown.
To examine the relative risks of depression, anxiety, substance abuse, somatoform/conversion disorder, and stress reaction/adjustment disorder during the periods before and after cancer diagnosis compared with individuals without cancer.
Nationwide matched cohort study from January 1, 2001, to December 31, 2010, in a Swedish population and health registers.
We estimated the time-varying hazard ratios (HRs) of the first clinical diagnosis of the studied mental disorders from 2 years before cancer diagnosis, through the time of diagnosis, and until 10 years after diagnosis, adjusting for age, sex, calendar period, and educational level. To assess milder mental conditions and symptoms, we further assessed the use of related psychiatric medications for patients with cancer diagnosed during 2008-2009.
The study included 304 118 patients with cancer and 3 041 174 cancer-free individuals who were randomly selected from the Swedish population and individually matched to the patients with cancer on year of birth and sex. The median age at diagnosis for the patients with cancer was 69 years, and 46.9% of the patients were female. The relative rate for all studied mental disorders started to increase from 10 months before cancer diagnosis (HR, 1.1; 95% CI, 1.1-1.2), peaked during the first week after diagnosis (HR, 6.7; 95% CI, 6.1-7.4), and decreased rapidly thereafter but remained elevated 10 years after diagnosis (HR, 1.1; 95% CI, 1.1-1.2). The rate elevation was clear for all main cancers except nonmelanoma skin cancer and was stronger for cancers of poorer prognosis. Compared with cancer-free individuals, increased use of psychiatric medications was noted from 1 month before cancer diagnosis and peaked around 3 months after diagnosis among patients with cancer.
Patients diagnosed as having cancer had increased risks of several common mental disorders from the year before diagnosis. These findings support the existing guidelines of integrating psychological management into cancer care and further call for extended vigilance for multiple mental disorders starting from the time of the cancer diagnostic workup.
In Barcelona, in Spain, the Retorn programme is breaking a taboo. It has been especially designed to help practising nurses suffering from addiction or psychological disorders. The care and follow-up are provided by a multi-disciplinary team in a clinic which caters for all types of health professionals, in complete confidentiality. 
Several studies have shown an imbalance between proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines in depression and anxiety disorders. However, less attention has been paid to the role of cytokines in psychological disorder in mothers who breastfeed. This study looks at whether concentration levels of TGF-β2 are altered in anxious and depressive breastfeeding mothers. This study checked the concentration level of TGF-B2 in relation with psychological symptoms on 110 breastfeeding mothers; based on random sampling method with using of Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), General Health Questionnaire (GHQ) and Spielberger Stress Scale (STAI) in 2015 also TGF-β2 was measured in breast milk using ELISA. We used of Pearson Correlation Method, independent t-test and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to analyze the data. Psychological symptoms (Anxiety and depression) showed positive correlation with TGF-Beta level in which relationships were significant (P=0.01). Psychological problems may be uniquely associated with the level of TGF-β in breast milk. More attention should be paid to the mental health of mothers during breastfeeding, and more research needs to be done in this subject to clarify the relationship between psychological variables with the level of TGF-β in breast milk.
Psychological disturbances play an increasingly important role in the pediatric practice. Since the efficacy of early interventions is well proven, screening instruments are of interest that could help pediatrists with the diagnostic procedure. The authors report on the prevalence of psychological disorders and/or somatoform symptoms with their effects on the psychological and health related quality of life in a consecutive representative pediatric population in a rural area. Altogether 511 children, juveniles and their parents participated in the study. The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), the Health Survey (SF-36) and the Children's Somatization Inventory (CSI) were administered. The results showed that a great percentage of the children and juveniles who did not primarily attend a pediatrist due to behavior problems did exhibit psychological and emotional disturbances. Among the 11- to 17-year-old children the boys were significantly more disturbed than the girls, based on parent ratings. Furthermore, 49% of the children and juveniles reported indications for somatoform disorders, in 7.2% the DSM-IV criteria for a somatization disorder were fulfilled. Girls met the criteria significantly more often than boys. The subjectively perceived quality of life of the children and juveniles was found to be reduced with the degree of the psychological problems and the degree of somatization.
With many youth presenting to primary care settings for mental health difficulties, knowledge of the respective evidence-based psychotherapies is imperative in ensuring that these youth receive the appropriate interventions in a timely manner. Most frequently, children present with internalizing and/or externalizing disorders, which cover a broad range of common pediatric mental disorders. Treatments of these disorders generally incorporate cognitive and/or behavioral components, which are derived from theoretical underpinnings and empirical support. Although the interventions share common components, they are distinctive in nature and are further tailored toward the idiosyncratic needs of children and their families. Careful consideration of the apposite intervention and individual needs of youth are pertinent to the effective amelioration of symptomology.
Anger is present as a key criterion in five diagnoses within DSM-5: Intermittent Explosive Disorder, Oppositional Defiant Disorder, Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder, Borderline Personality Disorder and Bipolar Disorder. This review amasses scientific literature demonstrating that within each of these disorders, anger is a central clinical feature that is highly prevalent and predictive of important outcomes. For each disorder, we also discuss the phenomenology and etiology of anger. Although models of anger have been quite distinct across these disorders, few empirical studies have truly tested whether anger stems from different etiological factors across these different conditions. We end with a discussion of transdiagnostic research that draws from cognitive psychology, affective science, and the neuroscience of anger, and that also fits with integrative approaches to treatment. 
The links between deficits in executive functions (EFs) (e.g., mental flexibility, inhibition capacities, etc.) and some psychological disorders (e.g., anxiety and depressive disorders) have been investigated in the past decades or so. Observations evidenced that some deficits in working memory, planning, and mental flexibility were highly correlated with anxiety and depressive disorders. The majority of studies focused on adults' population, whereas it seems important to adopt a developmental perspective to fully understand the dynamic relation of these EF/psychological disorders. We suggest to focus on the following two axes in future research: (i) relations between EF and anxiety traits through development and (ii) the possible role of external factors such as parent-child relationships on the development of EF.
Scientific knowledge about symptoms of common mental disorders in professional ice hockey is lacking. Consequently, the primary aims of the study were to (i) determine the prevalence, comorbidity and 6-month incidence of symptoms of common mental disorders (distress, anxiety/depression, sleep disturbance, adverse alcohol use, eating disorders) among current and retired professional ice hockey players and (ii) evaluate their potential relation with potential stressors (severe musculoskeletal injuries, surgeries, recent life events, career dissatisfaction).
A prospective cohort study with a 6-month follow-up period was conducted. Using validated questionnaires to assess symptoms of common mental disorders (thus not clinically diagnosed) as well as several stressors, an electronic questionnaire was set up and distributed by the national ice hockey players' unions from Denmark, Finland, Norway and Switzerland.
Prevalence ranged from 8% for adverse alcohol use to 24% for anxiety/depression among current professional ice hockey players, and from 12% for distress to 29% for adverse alcohol among retired professional ice hockey players. Six-month incidence reached up to 22% for eating disorders among current players and 25% for sleep disturbance among retired players. Especially a higher number of surgeries, a higher number of recent life events and higher level of career dissatisfaction was related to symptoms of common mental disorders.
Our findings indicate that adequate interventions should be developed to improve not only awareness and psychological resilience of both current and retired ice hockey players but also their performance and quality-of-life. An interdisciplinary approach should be applied in the medical care of ice hockey players by including psychologists/psychiatrists who can provide psychotherapeutic or clinical interventions.
