To evaluate the possibility of using 3D-printing in the management of patients with localized kidney cancer.
The study comprised five patients with localized kidney cancer who were treated at the Urology Clinic of the I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University from January 2016 to April 2017. Along with the standard examination, the patients underwent multispiral computed tomography (MSCT) to produce patient-specific 3D-printed models of the kidney tumors using 3D modeling and 3D printing. To evaluate the effectiveness of using 3D-printed models, two-stage preoperative planning was conducted, and five surgeons were surveyed using a four-question multiple choice questionnaire. At the first stage, the planning of operations was carried out based on MSCT findings. At the second stage, the surgeons were given patient-specific soft 3D models of the kidney with a tumor for preoperative training. After preoperative training, patients underwent laparoscopic resection of the kidney with a tumor.
According to the survey results, each of the participating surgeons at least once changed surgical plan based on data obtained with 3D printed models of the kidney with the tumor. The implementation of preoperative training using 3D printed models of the kidney turned out to be effective. All patients underwent laparoscopic surgery performed by a single surgeon with extensive experience in this type of surgery. The mean operative time was 187 minutes. All operations were performed with main renal artery occlusion. The men warm ischemia time was 19.5 minutes and the mean blood loss was 170 ml. There were no conversions to open surgery and organ-removing operations. There were no postoperative complications or deaths. All surgical margins were negative. Morphological examination showed that four patients had renal cell carcinoma one patient had the oncocytoma.
The study demonstrated the promise of using 3D printing for preoperative planning and surgical performance due to a high-precision three-dimensional soft patient-specific model of the localized kidney.
