To investigate the correlation of foveal microstructural changes with vision after intravitreal ranibizumab injection in eye with choroidal neovascularization (CNV) secondary to age-related macular degeneration.
We retrospectively studied 40 eyes of 40 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration who had no previous treatment history of age-related macular degeneration. All patients were treated with 3 monthly intravitreal ranibizumab (0.5 mg/0.05 mL) injections. One month after the third consecutive injection, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was evaluated and the eyes were categorized into 2 groups according to the change in BCVA (good function group: BCVA improvement ≥ logarithm of minimum angle of resolution 0.3; poor function group: BCVA improvement < logarithm of minimum angle of resolution 0.3). Changes of foveal photoreceptor layer integrity, CNV size (diameter and thickness), central macular thickness, center point thickness, outer nuclear layer thickness, and subretinal fluid in each group were also evaluated using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography.
The good function group is 20 eyes, and the poor function group is 20 eyes. No significant differences in baseline characteristics of variables including CNV type, initial BCVA, photoreceptor integrity, and CNV size were observed between the two groups. Best-corrected visual acuity in the good function group was 0.30 ± 0.17 (logarithm of minimum angle of resolution) and that in the poor function group was 0.48 ± 0.40 (logarithm of minimum angle of resolution). Decreased disrupted length of photoreceptor layer (1,020.80 ± 974.60) and decreased CNV thickness (78.86 ± 50.78) were found in the good function group at the end of follow-up. However, no significant differences in changes of CNV diameter, central macular thickness, center point thickness, outer nuclear layer thickness, and resolution of subretinal fluid were observed between the two groups.
Restoration of foveal photoreceptor integrity and decreased CNV thickness are closely associated with visual improvement in neovascular age-related macular degeneration after treatment.
