To investigate the association between the type of neovascularization (NV) and the clinical characteristics of nonneovascular fellow eyes in patients with unilateral, neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Eighty-three patients with treatment-naive, unilateral, neovascular age-related macular degeneration were retrospectively analyzed. Neovascular lesions were classified using both fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography as Type 1 (subretinal pigment epithelium), 2 (subretinal), 3 (intraretinal), or mixed NV. The associations between NV lesion type and baseline clinical and imaging characteristics of the fellow eye, including central geographic atrophy, noncentral geographic atrophy, pigmentary changes, soft drusen, cuticular drusen, reticular pseudodrusen, and subfoveal choroidal thickness, were examined. Subfoveal choroidal thickness was defined as thin if thickness was <120 μm.
In the fellow eyes of patients with treatment-naive, unilateral, neovascular age-related macular degeneration, Type 3 NV had an increased adjusted odds ratio of reticular pseudodrusen (15.361, P < 0.001) and thin subfoveal choroidal thickness (21.537, P < 0.001) as well as a tendency toward an increased adjusted odds ratio of central geographic atrophy (4.775, P = 0.028). Fellow eyes of patients with Type 1 NV showed a decreased adjusted odds ratio of reticular pseudodrusen (0.233, P = 0.007) and thin subfoveal choroidal thickness (0.080, P = 0.005).
In patients with unilateral, neovascular age-related macular degeneration, certain nonneovascular features of the fellow eye correlate with the NV lesion composition based on type, as anatomically classified utilizing both fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography. Patients with Type 3 NV were more likely to have reticular pseudodrusen and/or thin subfoveal choroidal thickness in the fellow eye compared with those with Type 1 NV. Patients with Type 3 NV also showed a trend toward increased central geographic atrophy in the fellow eye.
