To compare optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) with traditional multimodal imaging in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration in terms of guiding the treatment decision.
Prospective case series of 80 eyes of 73 consecutive patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration (39 women, mean age: 79.4 ± 5.3 years) diagnosed with different types of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) (58 Type I, 2 Type II, 6 mixed Type I and II, 3 retinal angiomatous proliferation, and 11 age-related macular degeneration-related polyps). The data obtained from traditional multimodal imaging, based on fluorescein angiography, indocyanine green angiography, and OCT were used to assess the need for treatment, those obtained from OCTA to identify two different patterns of CNV. Traditional multimodal imaging and OCTA findings were then compared with evaluate possible correspondence between treatment decision and CNV aspect on OCTA.
A CNV lesion was identified as Group A (requiring treatment) in 58 eyes (72.5%) in traditional multimodal imaging. On OCTA in 59 eyes (73.7%), the lesion was defined as Pattern I and the remaining 21 (26.3%) as Pattern II. There was 94.9% correspondence between the Pattern I CNV on OCTA and the cases Group A on conventional multimodal imaging. It was also computed 90.5% correspondence between Pattern II CNV on OCTA and the Group B (not requiring treatment) cases on conventional multimodal imaging. There was high (P < 0.05) interobserver agreement both for treatment decision in conventional multimodal and for Patterns (I or II) defining on OCTA imaging analysis.
This study demonstrates a high level of correspondence, in patients with exudative age-related macular degeneration, between different CNV patterns identified on OCTA and treatment decisions established on conventional multimodal imaging. Although fluorescein angiography remains the gold standard for determining the presence of leakage, and OCT shows fluid accumulation and its variations, OCTA may now offer noninvasive monitoring of the CNV, aiding for each treatment decision during the follow-up.
