Activity-based treatment regimens with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) are currently the gold standard for treatment of exudative age-related macular degeneration (nAMD). Whereas injection frequencies of approximately seven injections in the first year and six in the second year are expected with a pro re nata (PRN) regimen, retrospective real life observations have recorded significantly reduced numbers of injections. This study was carried out to investigate the reasons for the reduction in follow-up control appointments and to find out whether a telemedicine network could influence the motivation and compliance for regular control examinations and treatment.
The patient collective included 210 eyes from 191 patients with nAMD treated by anti-VEGF therapy in 2010 and 2011. The activity-based anti-VEGF treatment, control examinations and treatment intervals were performed according to the guidelines over a mean follow-up of 2 years. In another collective of 100 eyes from 100 patients with treatment of nAMD 2 groups were observed: 1 group with patients for whom control examinations were carried out close to home including an online transmission of the results to the treating retinal center and another group in which the patients had to be examined in the treatment center.
After 140 weeks 50 % of the patients in the first collective regularly attended control examinations and after 1 year the number was 79 %. After 2 years the probability of continuous supervision is given for only 62 % of the patients, whereas in 38 % the treatment was terminated. Of these patients treatment was terminated in 8 % due to valid criteria, whereas in 30 % of the patients the termination was unintentional. The main reason (38 %) for an unintentional termination of examination and treatment was the frequent and long journey. Patients in the second collective had a significantly higher compliance with respect to the control examinations (p < 0.001) and number of injections (p = 0.02) over the period of nearly 2 years due to the introduction of electronic transmission of images.
A long-term therapy of nAMD in the clinical routine can be achieved by a close relationship with the ophthalmologist, continuous follow-up controls and therapy cycles. A close telemedical networking between the ophthalmologist and the treatment center can lead to better patient compliance. Furthermore, the construction of such platforms represents a challenge not only for the treatment of nAMD but also for other diseases.
