The study highlights the role of Optical Coherence Angiography in the management of patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration who have developed subretinal fibrosis.
Development of subretinal fibrosis in the context of neovascular age-related macular degeneration is known to adversely affect visual function. The aim of this study is to assess structure and flow features obtained through swept-source optical coherence tomography angiography in patients with subretinal fibrosis and associate these with visual acuity.
Institutional retrospective cohort study PARTICIPANTS: 39 eyes of 39 patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration with subretinal fibrosis imaged with optical coherence tomography angiography were included in this study METHODS: Patients underwent Swept-Source Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography. Thickness of subretinal hyper-reflective material and presence and configuration of a choroidal neovascular membrane were recorded in each case.
A univariate multiple regression was performed seeking associations between visual acuity and structural and flow optical coherence tomography angiography features.
Average visual acuity on the date of optical coherence tomography angiography was 53 + 22 ETDRS letters. Average thickness of center-involving subretinal hyper-reflective material was 157 +/- 73 microns. A choroidal neovascular membrane was detectable in 26 cases and not detectable in 13. Visual acuity was independently influenced by thickness of subretinal hyper-reflective material (p=0.034) and presence of a detectable choroidal neovascular membrane (p=0.02) on optical coherence tomography angiography.
Poorer visual acuity in patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration and subretinal fibrosis is associated with presence of a detectable neovascular membrane on optical coherence tomography angiography. The role of optical coherence tomography angiography to guide nuanced management decisions in this patient population may be significant. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
